10841811	Segregation analysis of esophageal cancer in a moderately high-incidence area of northern China. In order to explore the mode of inheritance of esophageal cancer in a moderately high-incidence area of northern China, we conducted a pedigree survey on 225 patients affected by esophageal cancer in Yangquan, Shanxi Province. Segregation analysis was performed using the REGTL program of S.A.G.E. The results showed that Mendelian autosomal recessive inheritance of a major gene that influences susceptibility to esophageal cancer provided the best fit to the data. In the best-fitting recessive model, the frequency of the disease allele was.2039. There was a significant sex effect on susceptibility to the disease. The maximum cumulative probability of esophageal cancer among males with the AA genotype was 100%, but, among females, it was 63.5%. The mean age at onset for both men and women was 62 years. The age-dependent penetrances for males with the AA genotype by the ages of 60 and 80 years were 41.6% and 95.2%, respectively, whereas, for females, they were 26.4% and 60.5%, respectively. Incorporating environmental risk factors-such as cigarette smoking, pipe smoking, alcohol drinking, eating hot food, and eating pickled vegetables-into the models did not provide significant improvement of the fit of the models to these data. The results suggest a major locus underlying susceptibility to esophageal cancer with sex-specific penetrance.
10775524	Identification of uniparental disomy following prenatal detection of Robertsonian translocations and isochromosomes. Rearrangements of the acrocentric chromosomes (Robertsonian translocations and isochromosomes) are associated with an increased risk of aneuploidy. Given this, and the large number of reported cases of uniparental disomy (UPD) associated with an acrocentric rearrangement, carriers are presumed to be at risk for UPD. However, an accurate risk estimate for UPD associated with these rearrangements is lacking. A total of 174 prenatally identified acrocentric rearrangements, including both Robertsonian translocations and isochromosomes, were studied prospectively to identify UPD for the chromosomes involved in the rearrangements. The overall goal of the study was to provide an estimate of the risk of UPD associated with nonhomologous Robertsonian translocations and homologous acrocentric rearrangements. Of the 168 nonhomologous Robertsonian translocations studied, one showed UPD for chromosome 13, providing a risk estimate of 0.6%. Four of the six homologous acrocentric rearrangements showed UPD, providing a risk estimate of 66%. These cases have also allowed delineation of the mechanisms involved in producing UPD unique to Robertsonian translocations. Given the relatively high risk for UPD in prenatally identified Robertsonian translocations and isochromosomes, UPD testing should be considered, especially for cases involving the acrocentric chromosomes 14 and 15, in which UPD is associated with adverse clinical outcomes.
10712193	James V. Neel, M.D., Ph.D. (March 22, 1915-January 31, 2000): founder effect.
10712209	Combined analysis of hereditary prostate cancer linkage to 1q24-25: results from 772 hereditary prostate cancer families from the International Consortium for Prostate Cancer Genetics. A previous linkage study provided evidence for a prostate cancer-susceptibility locus at 1q24-25. Subsequent reports in additional collections of families have yielded conflicting results. In addition, evidence for locus heterogeneity has been provided by the identification of other putative hereditary prostate cancer loci on Xq27-28, 1q42-43, and 1p36. The present study describes a combined analysis for six markers in the 1q24-25 region in 772 families affected by hereditary prostate cancer and ascertained by the members of the International Consortium for Prostate Cancer Genetics (ICPCG) from North America, Australia, Finland, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Overall, there was some evidence for linkage, with a peak parametric multipoint LOD score assuming heterogeneity (HLOD) of 1.40 (P=.01) at D1S212. The estimated proportion of families (alpha) linked to the locus was.06 (1-LOD support interval.01-.12). This evidence was not observed by a nonparametric approach, presumably because of the extensive heterogeneity. Further parametric analysis revealed a significant effect of the presence of male-to-male disease transmission within the families. In the subset of 491 such families, the peak HLOD was 2.56 (P=.0006) and alpha =.11 (1-LOD support interval.04-.19), compared with HLODs of 0 in the remaining 281 families. Within the families with male-to-male disease transmission, alpha increased with the early mean age at diagnosis (<65 years, alpha =.19, with 1-LOD support interval.06-.34) and the number of affected family members (five or more family members, alpha =.15, with 1-LOD support interval.04-.28). The highest value of alpha was observed for the 48 families that met all three criteria (peak HLOD = 2.25, P=.001, alpha=.29, with 1-LOD support interval.08-.53). These results support the finding of a prostate cancer-susceptibility gene linked to 1q24-25, albeit in a defined subset of prostate cancer families. Although HPC1 accounts for only a small proportion of all families affected by hereditary prostate cancer, it appears to play a more prominent role in the subset of families with several members affected at an early age and with male-to-male disease transmission.
10739770	The gene for May-Hegglin anomaly localizes to a <1-Mb region on chromosome 22q12.3-13.1. The May-Hegglin anomaly (MHA) is an autosomal dominant platelet disorder of unknown etiology. It is characterized by thrombocytopenia, giant platelets, and leukocyte inclusion bodies, and affected heterozygotes are predisposed to bleeding episodes. The MHA gene has recently been localized, by means of linkage analysis, to a 13.6-cM region on chromosome 22, and the complete chromosome 22 sequence has been reported. We recently performed a genome scan for the MHA gene in 29 members of a large, multigenerational Italian family, and we now confirm that the MHA locus is on chromosome 22q12. 3-13.1. The maximal two-point LOD score of 4.50 was achieved with the use of marker D22S283, at a recombination fraction of.05. Haplotype analysis narrowed the MHA critical region to 6.6 cM between markers D22S683 and D22S1177. It is of note that the chromosome 22 sequence allowed all markers to be ordered correctly, identified all the candidate genes and predicted genes, and specifically determined the physical size of the MHA region to be 0. 7 Mb. These results significantly narrow the region in which the MHA gene is located, and they represent the first use of chromosome 22 data to positionally clone a disease gene.
10915611	Rare etiology of autosomal recessive disease in a child with noncarrier parents. A child with maple syrup urine disease type 2 (MSUD2) was found to be homozygous for a 10-bp MSUD2-gene deletion on chromosome 1. Both purported parents were tested, and neither carries the gene deletion. Polymorphic simple-sequence repeat analyses at 15 loci on chromosome 1 and at 16 loci on other chromosomes confirmed parentage and revealed that a de novo mutation prior to maternal meiosis I, followed by nondisjunction in maternal meiosis II, resulted in an oocyte with two copies of the de novo mutant allele. Fertilization by a sperm that did not carry a paternal chromosome 1 or subsequent mitotic loss of the paternal chromosome 1 resulted in the propositus inheriting two mutant MSUD2 alleles on two maternal number 1 chromosomes.
10712225	A recurrent expansion of a maternal allele with 36 CAG repeats causes Huntington disease in two sisters. Large intergenerational repeat expansions of the CAG trinucleotide repeat in the HD gene have been well documented for the male germline. We describe a recurrent large expansion of a maternal allele with 36 CAG repeats (to 66 and 57 repeats, respectively, in two daughters) associated with onset of Huntington disease (HD) in the second and third decade in a family without history of HD. Our findings give evidence of a gonadal mosaicism in the unaffected mother. We hypothesize that large expansions also occur in the female germline and that a negative selection of oocytes with long repeats might explain the different instability behavior of the male and the female germlines.
10712212	The distribution of human genetic diversity: a comparison of mitochondrial, autosomal, and Y-chromosome data. We report a comparison of worldwide genetic variation among 255 individuals by using autosomal, mitochondrial, and Y-chromosome polymorphisms. Variation is assessed by use of 30 autosomal restriction-site polymorphisms (RSPs), 60 autosomal short-tandem-repeat polymorphisms (STRPs), 13 Alu-insertion polymorphisms and one LINE-1 element, 611 bp of mitochondrial control-region sequence, and 10 Y-chromosome polymorphisms. Analysis of these data reveals substantial congruity among this diverse array of genetic systems. With the exception of the autosomal RSPs, in which an ascertainment bias exists, all systems show greater gene diversity in Africans than in either Europeans or Asians. Africans also have the largest total number of alleles, as well as the largest number of unique alleles, for most systems. GST values are 11%-18% for the autosomal systems and are two to three times higher for the mtDNA sequence and Y-chromosome RSPs. This difference is expected because of the lower effective population size of mtDNA and Y chromosomes. A lower value is seen for Y-chromosome STRs, reflecting a relative lack of continental population structure, as a result of rapid mutation and genetic drift. Africa has higher GST values than does either Europe or Asia for all systems except the Y-chromosome STRs and Alus. All systems except the Y-chromosome STRs show less variation between populations within continents than between continents. These results are reassuring in their consistency and offer broad support for an African origin of modern human populations.
10677305	A new locus for autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia maps to human chromosome 15q25-q26. High serum cholesterol is an established risk factor for cardiovascular disease and is the prime target for therapeutic intervention in large groups of patients. The development of modern treatments for this major risk factor was propelled by the early realization that forms of severe hypercholesterolemia could be caused by dominantly inherited defects in the LDL receptor or in the APOB gene. Further understanding of the mechanisms contributing to early atherosclerosis will allow for new targets for therapy. We therefore identified and investigated the genetics of families from Sardinia that have recessive inheritance of precocious hypercholesterolemia. We used five families in an analysis of linkage of the autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia locus, termed "ARH1," to chromosome 15q25-q26. A genomewide search mapped the disease-causing gene with a LOD score of 3.3 and excluded major contributions to the phenotype of other genes. A candidate gene present in the mapped chromosome region-the ligand-activated liver-transcription-factor gene ARP1 (apolipoprotein regulatory-protein gene)-has been excluded after DNA sequencing. The close-bred nature of the Sardinian population offers unique opportunities for isolation of this hypercholesterolemia-causing gene.
10884361	Statistical approaches to gene mapping.
10677321	A coalescent approach to study linkage disequilibrium between single-nucleotide polymorphisms. We present the results of extensive simulations that emulate the development and distribution of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and a gene locus that is phenotypically stratified into two classes (disease phenotype and wild-type phenotype). Our approach, based on coalescence theory, allows an explicit modeling of the demographic history of the population without conditioning on the age of the mutation, and serves as an efficient tool to carry out simulations. More specifically, we compare the influence that a constant population size or an exponentially growing population has on the amount of LD. These results indicate that attempts to locate single disease genes are most likely successful in small and constant populations. On the other hand, if we consider an exponentially growing population that started to expand from an initially constant population of reasonable size, then our simulations indicate a lower success rate. The power to detect association is enhanced if haplotypes constructed from several SNPs are used as markers. The versatility of the coalescence approach also allows the analysis of other relevant factors that influence the chances that a disease gene will be located. We show that several alleles leading to the same disease have no substantial influence on the amount of LD, as long as the differences between the disease-causing alleles are confined to the same region of the gene locus and as long as each allele occurs in an appreciable frequency. Our simulations indicate that mapping of less-frequent diseases is more likely to be successful. Moreover, we show that successful attempts to map complex diseases depend crucially on the phenotype-genotype correlations of all alleles at the disease locus. An analysis of lipoprotein lipase data indicates that our simulations capture the major features of LD occurring in biological data.
10677322	Estimation of variance components of quantitative traits in inbred populations. Use of variance-component estimation for mapping of quantitative-trait loci in humans is a subject of great current interest. When only trait values, not genotypic information, are considered, variance-component estimation can also be used to estimate heritability of a quantitative trait. Inbred pedigrees present special challenges for variance-component estimation. First, there are more variance components to be estimated in the inbred case, even for a relatively simple model including additive, dominance, and environmental effects. Second, more identity coefficients need to be calculated from an inbred pedigree in order to perform the estimation, and these are computationally more difficult to obtain in the inbred than in the outbred case. As a result, inbreeding effects have generally been ignored in practice. We describe here the calculation of identity coefficients and estimation of variance components of quantitative traits in large inbred pedigrees, using the example of HDL in the Hutterites. We use a multivariate normal model for the genetic effects, extending the central-limit theorem of Lange to allow for both inbreeding and dominance under the assumptions of our variance-component model. We use simulated examples to give an indication of under what conditions one has the power to detect the additional variance components and to examine their impact on variance-component estimation. We discuss the implications for mapping and heritability estimation by use of variance components in inbred populations.
10739764	Different mutations in the LMNA gene cause autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EMD) is a condition characterized by the clinical triad of early-onset contractures, progressive weakness in humeroperoneal muscles, and cardiomyopathy with conduction block. The disease was described for the first time as an X-linked muscular dystrophy, but autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive forms were reported. The genes for X-linked EMD and autosomal dominant EMD (AD-EMD) were identified. We report here that heterozygote mutations in LMNA, the gene for AD-EMD, may cause diverse phenotypes ranging from typical EMD to no phenotypic effect. Our results show that LMNA mutations are also responsible for the recessive form of the disease. Our results give further support to the notion that different genetic forms of EMD have a common pathophysiological background. The distribution of the mutations in AD-EMD patients (in the tail and in the 2A rod domain) suggests that unique interactions between lamin A/C and other nuclear components exist that have an important role in cardiac and skeletal muscle function.
10775530	Intragenic inversion of mtDNA: a new type of pathogenic mutation in a patient with mitochondrial myopathy. We report an unusual molecular defect in the mitochondrially encoded ND1 subunit of NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) in a patient with mitochondrial myopathy and isolated complex I deficiency. The mutation is an inversion of seven nucleotides within the ND1 gene, which maintains the reading frame. The inversion, which alters three highly conserved amino acids in the polypeptide, was heteroplasmic in the patient's muscle but was not detectable in blood. This is the first report of a pathogenic inversion mutation in human mtDNA.
11078480	The extent of linkage disequilibrium in four populations with distinct demographic histories. The design and feasibility of whole-genome-association studies are critically dependent on the extent of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between markers. Although there has been extensive theoretical discussion of this, few empirical data exist. The authors have determined the extent of LD among 38 biallelic markers with minor allele frequencies >.1, since these are most comparable to the common disease-susceptibility polymorphisms that association studies aim to detect. The markers come from three chromosomal regions-1,335 kb on chromosome 13q12-13, 380 kb on chromosome 19q13.2, and 120 kb on chromosome 22q13.3-which have been extensively mapped. These markers were examined in approximately 1,600 individuals from four populations, all of European origin but with different demographic histories; Afrikaners, Ashkenazim, Finns, and East Anglian British. There are few differences, either in allele frequencies or in LD, among the populations studied. A similar inverse relationship was found between LD and distance in each genomic region and in each population. Mean D' is.68 for marker pairs <5 kb apart and is.24 for pairs separated by 10-20 kb, and the level of LD is not different from that seen in unlinked marker pairs separated by >500 kb. However, only 50% of marker pairs at distances <5 kb display sufficient LD (delta>.3) to be useful in association studies. Results of the present study, if representative of the whole genome, suggest that a whole-genome scan searching for common disease-susceptibility alleles would require markers spaced < or = 5 kb apart.
10631132	Elevated levels of FMR1 mRNA in carrier males: a new mechanism of involvement in the fragile-X syndrome. Fragile-X syndrome is a trinucleotide-repeat-expansion disorder in which the clinical phenotype is believed to result from transcriptional silencing of the fragile-X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene as the number of CGG repeats exceeds approximately 200. For premutation alleles ( approximately 55-200 repeats), no abnormalities in FMR1-gene expression have been described, despite growing evidence of clinical involvement in premutation carriers. To address this (apparent) paradox, we have determined, for 16 carrier males (55-192 repeats), the relative levels of leukocyte FMR1 mRNA, by use of automated fluorescence-detection reverse transcriptase-PCR, and the percent of lymphocytes that are immunoreactive for FMR1 protein (FMRP). For some alleles with>100 repeats, there was a reduction in the number of FMRP-positive cells. Unexpectedly, FMR1 mRNA levels were elevated at least fivefold within this same range. No significant increase in FMR1 mRNA stability was observed in a lymphoblastoid cell line (160 repeats) derived from one of the carrier males, suggesting that the increased message levels are due to an increased rate of transcription. Current results support a mechanism of involvement in premutation carriers, in which reduced translational efficiency is at least partially compensated through increased transcriptional activity. Thus, diminished translational efficiency may be important throughout much of the premutation range, with a mechanistic switch occurring in the full-mutation range as the FMR1 gene is silenced.
11078473	The peopling of Europe from the maternal and paternal perspectives.
11023809	Major genes regulating total serum immunoglobulin E levels in families with asthma. Immunoglobulin E (IgE) has a major role in the pathogenesis of allergic disorders and asthma. Previous data from 92 families, each identified through a proband with asthma, showed evidence for two major genes regulating total serum IgE levels. One of these genes mapped to 5q31-33. In the current study, the segregation analysis was extended by the addition of 108 probands and their families, ascertained in the same manner. A mixed recessive model (i.e., major recessive gene and residual genetic effect) was the best-fitting and most-parsimonious one-locus model of the segregation analysis. A mixed two-major-gene model (i.e., two major genes and residual genetic effect) fit the data significantly better than did the mixed recessive one-major-gene model. The second gene modified the effect of the first recessive gene. Individuals with the genotype aaBB (homozygous high-risk allele at the first gene and homozygous low-risk allele at the second locus) had normal IgE levels (mean 23 IU/ml), and only individuals with genotypes aaBb and aabb had high IgE levels (mean 282 IU/ml). A genomewide screening was performed using variance-component analysis. Significant evidence for linkage was found for a novel locus at 7q, with a multipoint LOD score of 3. 36 (P=.00004). A LOD score of 3.65 (P=.00002) was obtained after genotyping additional markers in this region. Evidence for linkage was also found for two previously reported regions, 5q and 12q, with LOD scores of 2.73 (P=.0002) and 2.46 (P=.0004), respectively. These results suggest that several major genes, plus residual genetic effects, regulate total serum IgE levels.
10762557	Complement factor H gene mutation associated with autosomal recessive atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
10677310	Fine localization of a major disease-susceptibility locus for diffuse panbronchiolitis. Diffuse panbronchiolitis affecting East Asians is strongly associated with the class I human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles. Recent observations suggest that a major disease-susceptibility gene may be located between the HLA-B and HLA-A loci in the class I region of the major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6. To test this possibility, we analyzed 14 polymorphic markers in 92 Japanese patients and 93 healthy controls. Of these, seven marker alleles, including HLA-B54 and HLA-A11, were significantly associated with the disease. Maximum-likelihood haplotype analysis and subsequent direct determination of individual haplotypes identified a group of disease-associated haplotypes, one of which contained all seven disease-associated marker alleles. Another haplotype, containing HLA-B*5504, was also associated with the disease. All these haplotypes seem to have diverged from a common ancestral haplotype in East Asians and share a specific segment containing three consecutive markers between the S and TFIIH loci in the class I region. Furthermore, one of the markers within the candidate region showed the highest delta value, indicating the strongest association. Of 20 Korean patients with diffuse panbronchiolitis, 17 also shared the combination of the disease-associated marker alleles within the candidate region. These results indicate that an HLA-associated major susceptibility gene for diffuse panbronchiolitis is probably located within the 200 kb in the class I region 300 kb telomeric of the HLA-B locus on the chromosome 6p21.3.
16826533	Mutations in WNT7A cause a range of limb malformations, including Fuhrmann syndrome and Al-Awadi/Raas-Rothschild/Schinzel phocomelia syndrome. Fuhrmann syndrome and the Al-Awadi/Raas-Rothschild/Schinzel phocomelia syndrome are considered to be distinct limb-malformation disorders characterized by various degrees of limb aplasia/hypoplasia and joint dysplasia in humans. In families with these syndromes, we found homozygous missense mutations in the dorsoventral-patterning gene WNT7A and confirmed their functional significance in retroviral-mediated transfection of chicken mesenchyme cell cultures and developing limbs. The results suggest that a partial loss of WNT7A function causes Fuhrmann syndrome (and a phenotype similar to mouse Wnt7a knockout), whereas the more-severe limb truncation phenotypes observed in Al-Awadi/Raas-Rothschild/Schinzel phocomelia syndrome result from null mutations (and cause a phenotype similar to mouse Shh knockout). These findings illustrate the specific and conserved importance of WNT7A in multiple aspects of vertebrate limb development.
16358216	A novel framework for sib pair linkage analysis. Sib pair linkage analysis of a dichotomous trait is a popular method for narrowing the search for genes that influence complex diseases. Although the pedigree structures are uncomplicated and the underlying genetic principles straightforward, a surprising degree of complexity is involved in implementing a sib pair study and interpreting the results. Ascertainment may be based on affected, discordant, or unaffected sib pairs, as well as on pairs defined by threshold values for quantitative traits, such as extreme discordant sib pairs. To optimize power, various domain restrictions and null hypotheses have been proposed for each of these designs, yielding a wide array of choices for the analyst. To begin, we systematically classify the major sources of discretion in sib pair linkage analysis. Then, we extend the work of Kruglyak and Lander (1995), to bring the various forms into a unified framework and to facilitate a more general approach to the analysis. Finally, we describe a new, freely available computer program, Splat (Sib Pair Linkage Analysis Testing), that can perform any sib pair statistical test currently in use, as well as any user-defined test yet to be proposed. Splat uses the expectation maximization algorithm to calculate maximum-likelihood estimates of sharing (subject to user-specified conditions) and then plots LOD scores versus chromosomal position. It includes a novel grid-scanning capability that enables simultaneous visualization of multiple test statistics. This can lead to further insight into the genetic basis of the disease process under consideration. In addition, phenotype definitions can be modified without the recalculation of inheritance vectors, thereby providing considerable flexibility for exploratory analysis. The application of Splat will be illustrated with data from studies on the genetics of diabetic nephropathy.
16642433	Polymorphism in maternal LRP8 gene is associated with fetal growth. Fetal growth restriction (FGR) affects >200,000 pregnancies in the United States annually and is associated with increased perinatal mortality and morbidity, as well as poorer long-term health for infants with FGR compared with infants without FGR. FGR appears to be a complex trait, but the role of genetic factors in the development of FGR is largely unknown. We conducted a candidate-gene association study of birth weight and FGR in two independent study samples obtained at the Boston Medical Center. We first investigated the association between maternal genotypes of 68 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 41 candidate genes and fetal growth in a sample of 204 black women selected for a previous study of preeclampsia, 92 of whom had preeclampsia (characterized by high blood pressure and the presence of protein in the urine). We found significant association between SNP rs2297660 in the LRP8 gene and birth weight. Subsequently, we replicated the association in a larger independent sample of 1,094 black women; similar association between LRP8 and FGR was observed in this sample. The "A" allele at rs2297660 was associated with a higher standardized birth weight and a lower risk of FGR. Under the additive genetic model, each additional copy of the "A" allele reduced the risk of FGR by 33% (P<.05). In conclusion, results from the two independent samples of black women provide consistent evidence that SNP rs2297660 in LRP8 is associated with fetal growth.
16358215	Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria is caused by mutations in the sodium-phosphate cotransporter gene SLC34A3. Hypophosphatemia due to isolated renal phosphate wasting results from a heterogeneous group of disorders. Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH) is an autosomal recessive form that is characterized by reduced renal phosphate reabsorption, hypophosphatemia, and rickets. It can be distinguished from other forms of hypophosphatemia by increased serum levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D resulting in hypercalciuria. Using SNP array genotyping, we mapped the disease locus in two consanguineous families to the end of the long arm of chromosome 9. The candidate region contained a sodium-phosphate cotransporter gene, SLC34A3, which has been shown to be expressed in proximal tubulus cells. Sequencing of this gene revealed disease-associated mutations in five families, including two frameshift and one splice-site mutation. Loss of function of the SLC34A3 protein presumably results in a primary renal tubular defect and is compatible with the HHRH phenotype. We also show that the phosphaturic factor FGF23 (fibroblast growth factor 23), which is increased in X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets and carries activating mutations in autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets, is at normal or low-normal serum levels in the patients with HHRH, further supporting a primary renal defect. Identification of the gene mutated in a further form of hypophosphatemia adds to the understanding of phosphate homeostasis and may help to elucidate the interaction of the proteins involved in this pathway.
16642431	Fine-mapping chromosome 20 in 230 systemic lupus erythematosus sib pair and multiplex families: evidence for genetic epistasis with chromosome 16q12. The presence of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility genes on chromosome 20 is suggested by the observation of genetic linkage in several independent SLE family collections. To further localize the genetic effects, we typed 59 microsatellites in the two best regions, as defined by genome screens. Genotypes were analyzed for statistical linkage and/or association with SLE, by use of a combination of nonparametric linkage methods, family-based tests of association (transmission/disequilibrium and pedigree disequilibrium tests), and haplotype-sharing statistics (haplotype runs test), in a set of 230 SLE pedigrees. Maximal evidence for linkage to SLE was to 20p12 (LOD = 2.84) and 20q13.1 (LOD = 1.64) in the white pedigrees. Subsetting families on the basis of evidence for linkage to 16q12 significantly improved the LOD scores at both chromosome 20 locations (20p12 LOD = 5.06 and 20q13 LOD = 3.65), consistent with epistasis. We then typed 162 single-nucleotide polymorphism markers across a 1.3-Mb candidate region on 20q13.1 and identified several SNPs that demonstrated significant evidence for association. These data provide additional support for linkage and association to 20p12 and 20q13.1 in SLE and further refine the intervals of interest. These data further suggest the possibility of epistatic relationships among loci within the 20q12, 20q13, and 16q12 regions in SLE families.
16960802	Mutations in CABP4, the gene encoding the Ca2+-binding protein 4, cause autosomal recessive night blindness. Mutations in genes encoding either components of the phototransduction cascade or proteins presumably involved in signaling from photoreceptors to adjacent second-order neurons have been shown to cause congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB). Sequence alterations in CACNA1F lead to the incomplete type of CSNB (CSNB2), which can be distinguished by standard electroretinography (ERG). CSNB2 is associated with a reduced rod b-wave, a substantially reduced cone a-wave, and a reduced 30-Hz flicker ERG response. CACNA1F encodes the alpha 1-subunit of an L-type Ca2+ channel (Cav1.4 alpha ), which is specific to photoreceptors and is present at high density in the synaptic terminals. Ten of our patients with CSNB2 showed no mutation in CACNA1F. To identify the disease-causing mutations, we used a candidate-gene approach. CABP4, a member of the calcium-binding protein (CABP) family, is located in photoreceptor synaptic terminals and is directly associated with the C-terminal domain of the Cav1.4 alpha . Mice lacking either Cabp4 or Cav1.4 alpha display a CSNB2-like phenotype. Here, we report for the first time that mutations in CABP4 lead to autosomal recessive CSNB. Our studies revealed homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in two families. We also show that these mutations reduce the transcript levels to 30%-40% of those in controls. This suggests that the reduced amount of CABP4 is the reason for the signaling defect in these patients.
16773577	Familial osteoarthritis of the hip joint associated with acetabular dysplasia maps to chromosome 13q. Genetic factors have been implicated in osteoarthritis (OA), particularly in OA of the hip joint (hip OA). Several instances of familial hip OA that show distinctive modes of inheritance but that differ from chondrodysplasia have been reported. Here, we report the characterization of a large Japanese family with an inherited disease of the hip that is indistinguishable from common hip OA, as evidenced by clinical symptoms and radiographs of the joint. This family contained eight patients in 4 generations. Affected individuals develop pain in the hip joint during adolescence, and the disease progresses to severe crippling before age 60 years. Patients generally are in good health, height is not reduced, and there is no extraskeletal involvement suggestive of chondrodysplasia. The skeletal change is bilateral acetabular dysplasia followed by OA, which occurs after age approximately 40 years and is indistinguishable from idiopathic nonfamilial dysplastic hip OA. This trait shows autosomal dominant inheritance, with a considerably consistent phenotype. Genomewide screening revealed linkage at chromosome 13q22, and haplotype analysis narrowed the locus to a 6.0-cM interval between markers D13S1296 and D13S162, with a maximal multipoint LOD score of 3.57. The family described here represents a novel genetic entity as a monogenic form of hip OA. Its further characterization can aid in elucidating the etiology and pathogenesis of a common idiopathic form of OA.
16642441	Association of polymorphisms in the Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene with Alzheimer disease in an Israeli Arab community. Several lines of evidence support for a role of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) in Alzheimer disease (AD). Most genetic studies have focused on an Alu insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism in the ACE gene (DCP1) and have yielded conflicting results. We evaluated the association between 15 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DCP1, including the I/D variant, and AD in a sample of 92 patients with AD and 166 nondemented controls from an inbred Israeli Arab community. Although there was no evidence for association between AD and I/D, we observed significant association with SNPs rs4343 (P = .00001) and rs4351 (P = .01). Haplotype analysis revealed remarkably significant evidence of association with the SNP combination rs4343 and rs4351 (global P = 7.5 x 10(-7)). Individuals possessing the haplotype "GA" (frequency 0.21 in cases and 0.01 in controls) derived from these SNPs had a 45-fold increased risk of developing AD (95% CI 6.0-343.2) compared with those possessing any of the other three haplotypes. Longer range haplotypes including I/D were even more significant (lowest global P = 1.1 x 10(-12)), but the only consistently associated alleles were in rs4343 and rs4351. These results suggest that a variant in close proximity to rs4343 and rs4351 modulates susceptibility to AD in this community.
16909394	Mutations in the CEP290 (NPHP6) gene are a frequent cause of Leber congenital amaurosis. Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is one of the main causes of childhood blindness. To date, mutations in eight genes have been described, which together account for approximately 45% of LCA cases. We localized the genetic defect in a consanguineous LCA-affected family from Quebec and identified a splice defect in a gene encoding a centrosomal protein (CEP290). The defect is caused by an intronic mutation (c.2991+1655A-->G) that creates a strong splice-donor site and inserts a cryptic exon in the CEP290 messenger RNA. This mutation was detected in 16 (21%) of 76 unrelated patients with LCA, either homozygously or in combination with a second deleterious mutation on the other allele. CEP290 mutations therefore represent one of the most frequent causes of LCA identified so far.
16909392	Navajo neurohepatopathy is caused by a mutation in the MPV17 gene. Navajo neurohepatopathy (NNH) is an autosomal recessive disease that is prevalent among Navajo children in the southwestern United States. The major clinical features are hepatopathy, peripheral neuropathy, corneal anesthesia and scarring, acral mutilation, cerebral leukoencephalopathy, failure to thrive, and recurrent metabolic acidosis with intercurrent infections. Infantile, childhood, and classic forms of NNH have been described. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion was detected in the livers of two patients, suggesting a primary defect in mtDNA maintenance. Homozygosity mapping of two families with NNH suggested linkage to chromosome 2p24. This locus includes the MPV17 gene, which, when mutated, causes a hepatocerebral form of mtDNA depletion. Sequencing of the MPV17 gene in six patients with NNH from five families revealed the homozygous R50Q mutation described elsewhere. Identification of a single missense mutation in patients with NNH confirms that the disease is probably due to a founder effect and extends the phenotypic spectrum associated with MPV17 mutations.
16960800	A genomewide single-nucleotide-polymorphism panel with high ancestry information for African American admixture mapping. Admixture mapping requires a genomewide panel of relatively evenly spaced markers that can distinguish the ancestral origins of chromosomal segments in admixed individuals. Through use of the results of the International HapMap Project and specific selection criteria, the current study has examined the ability of selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to extract continental ancestry information in African American subjects and to explore parameters for admixture mapping. Genotyping of two linguistically diverse West African populations (Bini and Kanuri Nigerians, who are Niger-Congo [Bantu] and Nilo-Saharan speakers, respectively), European Americans, and African Americans validated a genomewide set of >4,000 SNP ancestry-informative markers with mean and median F(ST) values >0.59 and mean and median Fisher's information content >2.5. This set of SNPs extracted a larger amount of ancestry information in African Americans than previously reported SNP panels and provides nearly uniform coverage of the genome. Moreover, in the current study, simulations show that this more informative panel improves power for admixture mapping in African Americans when ethnicity risk ratios are modest. This is particularly important in the application of admixture mapping in complex genetic diseases for which only modest ethnicity risk ratios of relevant susceptibility genes are expected.
16642442	Breakpoint cloning and haplotype analysis indicate a single origin of the common Inv(10)(p11.2q21.2) mutation among northern Europeans. The pericentric inv(10)(p11.2q21.2) mutation has been frequently identified in cytogenetic laboratories, is phenotypically silent, and is considered to be a polymorphic variant. Cloning and sequencing of the junction fragments on 10p11 and 10q21 revealed that neither inversion breakpoint directly involved any genes or repetitive sequences, although both breakpoint regions contain a number of repeats. All 20 apparently unrelated inv(10) families in our study had identical breakpoints, and detailed haplotype analysis showed that the inversions were identical by descent. Thus, although considered a common variant, inv(10)(p11.2q21.2) has a single ancestral founder among northern Europeans.
16532386	Genome scan for loci predisposing to anxiety disorders using a novel multivariate approach: strong evidence for a chromosome 4 risk locus. We conducted a 10-centimorgan linkage autosomal genome scan in a set of 19 extended American pedigrees (219 subjects) ascertained through probands with panic disorder. Several anxiety disorders--including social phobia, agoraphobia, and simple phobia--in addition to panic disorder segregate in these families. In previous studies of this sample, linkage analyses were based separately on each of the individual categorical affection diagnoses. Given the substantial comorbidity between anxiety disorders and their probable shared genetic liability, it is clear that this method discards a considerable amount of information. In this article, we propose a new approach that considers panic disorder, simple phobia, social phobia, and agoraphobia as expressions of the same multivariate, putatively genetically influenced trait. We applied the most powerful multipoint Haseman-Elston method, using the grade of membership score generated from a fuzzy clustering of these phenotypes as the dependent variable in Haseman-Elston regression. One region on chromosome 4q31-q34, at marker D4S413 (with multipoint and single-point nominal P values < .00001), showed strong evidence of linkage (genomewide significance at P<.05). The same region is known to be the site of a neuropeptide Y receptor gene, NPY1R (4q31-q32), that was recently connected to anxiolytic-like effects in rats. Several other regions on four chromosomes (4q21.21-22.3, 5q14.2-14.3, 8p23.1, and 14q22.3-23.3) met criteria for suggestive linkage (multipoint nominal P values < .01). Family-by-family analysis did not show any strong evidence of heterogeneity. Our findings support the notion that the major anxiety disorders, including phobias and panic disorder, are complex traits that share at least one susceptibility locus. This method could be applied to other complex traits for which shared genetic-liability factors are thought to be important, such as substance dependencies.
16532395	Spread of an inactive form of caspase-12 in humans is due to recent positive selection. The human caspase-12 gene is polymorphic for the presence or absence of a stop codon, which results in the occurrence of both active (ancestral) and inactive (derived) forms of the gene in the population. It has been shown elsewhere that carriers of the inactive gene are more resistant to severe sepsis. We have now investigated whether the inactive form has spread because of neutral drift or positive selection. We determined its distribution in a worldwide sample of 52 populations and resequenced the gene in 77 individuals from the HapMap Yoruba, Han Chinese, and European populations. There is strong evidence of positive selection from low diversity, skewed allele-frequency spectra, and the predominance of a single haplotype. We suggest that the inactive form of the gene arose in Africa approximately 100-500 thousand years ago (KYA) and was initially neutral or almost neutral but that positive selection beginning approximately 60-100 KYA drove it to near fixation. We further propose that its selective advantage was sepsis resistance in populations that experienced more infectious diseases as population sizes and densities increased.
16826523	Submicroscopic deletion in patients with Williams-Beuren syndrome influences expression levels of the nonhemizygous flanking genes. Genomic imbalance is a common cause of phenotypic abnormalities. We measured the relative expression level of genes that map within the microdeletion that causes Williams-Beuren syndrome and within its flanking regions. We found, unexpectedly, that not only hemizygous genes but also normal-copy neighboring genes show decreased relative levels of expression. Our results suggest that not only the aneuploid genes but also the flanking genes that map several megabases away from a genomic rearrangement should be considered possible contributors to the phenotypic variation in genomic disorders.
17186465	Exact tests of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and homogeneity of disequilibrium across strata. Detecting departures from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) of marker-genotype frequencies is a crucial first step in almost all human genetic analyses. When a sample is stratified by multiple ethnic groups, it is important to allow the marker-allele frequencies to differ over the strata. In this situation, it is common to test for HWE by using an exact test within each stratum and then using the minimum P value as a global test. This approach does not account for multiple testing, and, because it does not combine information over strata, it does not have optimal power. Several approximate methods to combine information over strata have been proposed, but most of them sum over strata a measure of departure from HWE; if the departures are in different directions, then summing can diminish the overall evidence of departure from HWE. An exact stratified test is more appealing because it uses the probability of genotype configurations across the strata as evidence for global departures from HWE. We developed an exact stratified test for HWE for diallelic markers, such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and an exact test for homogeneity of Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium. By applying our methods to data from Perlegen and HapMap--a combined total of more than five million SNP genotypes, with three to four strata and strata sizes ranging from 23 to 60 subjects--we illustrate that the exact stratified test provides more-robust and more-powerful results than those obtained by either the minimum of exact test P values over strata or approximate stratified tests that sum measures of departure from HWE. Hence, our new methods should be useful for samples composed of multiple ethnic groups.
16960803	Satb2 haploinsufficiency phenocopies 2q32-q33 deletions, whereas loss suggests a fundamental role in the coordination of jaw development. The recent identification of SATB2 as a candidate gene responsible for the craniofacial dysmorphologies associated with deletions and translocations at 2q32-q33, one of only three regions of the genome for which haploinsufficiency has been significantly associated with isolated cleft palate, led us to investigate the in vivo functions of murine Satb2. We find that, similar to the way in which SATB2 is perceived to act in humans, craniofacial defects due to haploinsufficiency of Satb2, including cleft palate (in approximately 25% of cases), phenocopy those seen with 2q32-q33 deletions and translocations in humans. Full functional loss of Satb2 results in amplification of these defects and leads both to increased apoptosis in the craniofacial mesenchyme where Satb2 is usually expressed and to changes in the pattern of expression of three genes implicated in the regulation of craniofacial development in humans and mice: Pax9, Alx4, and Msx1. The Satb2-dosage sensitivity in craniofacial development is conspicuous--along with its control of cell survival, pattern of expression, and reversible functional modification by SUMOylation, it suggests that Satb2/SATB2 function in craniofacial development may prove to be more profound than has been anticipated previously. Because jaw development is Satb2-dosage sensitive, the regulators of Satb2 expression and posttranslational modification become of critical importance both ontogenetically and evolutionarily, especially since such regulators plausibly play undetected roles in jaw and palate development and in the etiology of craniofacial malformations.
16960810	Familial chilblain lupus, a monogenic form of cutaneous lupus erythematosus, maps to chromosome 3p. Systemic lupus erythematosus is a prototypic autoimmune disease. Apart from rare monogenic deficiencies of complement factors, where lupuslike disease may occur in association with other autoimmune diseases or high susceptibility to bacterial infections, its etiology is multifactorial in nature. Cutaneous findings are a hallmark of the disease and manifest either alone or in association with internal-organ disease. We describe a novel genodermatosis characterized by painful bluish-red inflammatory papular or nodular lesions in acral locations such as fingers, toes, nose, cheeks, and ears. The lesions sometimes appear plaquelike and tend to ulcerate. Manifestation usually begins in early childhood and is precipitated by cold and wet exposure. Apart from arthralgias, there is no evidence for internal-organ disease or an increased susceptibility to infection. Histological findings include a deep inflammatory infiltrate with perivascular distribution and granular deposits of immunoglobulins and complement along the basement membrane. Some affected individuals show antinuclear antibodies or immune complex formation, whereas cryoglobulins or cold agglutinins are absent. Thus, the findings are consistent with chilblain lupus, a rare form of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Investigation of a large German kindred with 18 affected members suggests a highly penetrant trait with autosomal dominant inheritance. By single-nucleotide-polymorphism-based genomewide linkage analysis, the locus was mapped to chromosome 3p. Haplotype analysis defined the locus to a 13.8-cM interval with a LOD score of 5.04. This is the first description of a monogenic form of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Identification of the gene responsible for familial chilblain lupus may shed light on the pathogenesis of common forms of connective-tissue disease such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
16909383	A new autosomal recessive form of Stickler syndrome is caused by a mutation in the COL9A1 gene. Stickler syndrome is characterized by ophthalmic, articular, orofacial, and auditory manifestations. It has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern and is caused by mutations in COL2A1, COL11A1, and COL11A2. We describe a family of Moroccan origin that consists of four children with Stickler syndrome, six unaffected children, and two unaffected parents who are distant relatives (fifth degree). All family members were clinically investigated for ear, nose, and throat; ophthalmologic; and radiological abnormalities. Four children showed symptoms characteristic of Stickler syndrome, including moderate-to-severe sensorineural hearing loss, moderate-to-high myopia with vitreoretinopathy, and epiphyseal dysplasia. We considered the COL9A1 gene, located on chromosome 6q13, to be a candidate gene on the basis of the structural association with collagen types II and XI and because of the high expression in the human inner ear indicated by cDNA microarray. Mutation analysis of the coding region of the COL9A1 gene showed a homozygous R295X mutation in the four affected children. The parents and four unaffected children were heterozygous carriers of the R295X mutation. Two unaffected children were homozygous for the wild-type allele. None of the family members except the homozygous R295X carriers had any signs of Stickler syndrome. Therefore, COL9A1 is the fourth identified gene that can cause Stickler syndrome. In contrast to the three previously reported Stickler syndrome-causing genes, this gene causes a form of Stickler syndrome with an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. This finding will have a major impact on the genetic counseling of patients with Stickler syndrome and on the understanding of the pathophysiology of collagens. Mutation analysis of this gene is recommended in patients with Stickler syndrome with possible autosomal recessive inheritance.
16773567	Intra- and interindividual epigenetic variation in human germ cells. Epigenetics represents a secondary inheritance system that has been poorly investigated in human biology. The objective of this study was to perform a comprehensive analysis of DNA methylation variation between and within the germlines of normal males. First, methylated cytosines were mapped using bisulphite modification-based sequencing in the promoter regions of the following disease genes: presenilins (PSEN1 and PSEN2), breast cancer (BRCA1 and BRCA2), myotonic dystrophy (DM1), and Huntington disease (HD). Major epigenetic variation was detected within samples, since the majority of sperm cells of the same individual exhibited unique DNA methylation profiles. In the interindividual analysis, 41 of 61 pairwise comparisons revealed distinct DNA methylation profiles (P=.036 to 6.8 x 10(-14)). Second, a microarray-based epigenetic profiling of the same sperm samples was performed using a 12,198-feature CpG island microarray. The microarray analysis has identified numerous DNA methylation-variable positions in the germ cell genome. The largest degree of variation was detected within the promoter CpG islands and pericentromeric satellites among the single-copy DNA fragments and repetitive elements, respectively. A number of genes, such as EED, CTNNA2, CALM1, CDH13, and STMN2, exhibited age-related DNA methylation changes. Finally, allele-specific methylation patterns in CDH13 were detected. This study provides evidence for significant epigenetic variability in human germ cells, which warrants further research to determine whether such epigenetic patterns can be efficiently transmitted across generations and what impact inherited epigenetic individuality may have on phenotypic outcomes in health and disease.
23084292	Unraveling multiple MHC gene associations with systemic lupus erythematosus: model choice indicates a role for HLA alleles and non-HLA genes in Europeans. We have performed a meta-analysis of the major-histocompatibility-complex (MHC) region in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) to determine the association with both SNPs and classical human-leukocyte-antigen (HLA) alleles. More specifically, we combined results from six studies and well-known out-of-study control data sets, providing us with 3,701 independent SLE cases and 12,110 independent controls of European ancestry. This study used genotypes for 7,199 SNPs within the MHC region and for classical HLA alleles (typed and imputed). Our results from conditional analysis and model choice with the use of the Bayesian information criterion show that the best model for SLE association includes both classical loci (HLA-DRB1()03:01, HLA-DRB1()08:01, and HLA-DQA1()01:02) and two SNPs, rs8192591 (in class III and upstream of NOTCH4) and rs2246618 (MICB in class I). Our approach was to perform a stepwise search from multiple baseline models deduced from a priori evidence on HLA-DRB1 lupus-associated alleles, a stepwise regression on SNPs alone, and a stepwise regression on HLA alleles. With this approach, we were able to identify a model that was an overwhelmingly better fit to the data than one identified by simple stepwise regression either on SNPs alone (Bayes factor [BF] > 50) or on classical HLA alleles alone (BF > 1,000).
22444671	Mutations in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol gene PIGL cause CHIME syndrome. CHIME syndrome is characterized by colobomas, heart defects, ichthyosiform dermatosis, mental retardation (intellectual disability), and ear anomalies, including conductive hearing loss. Whole-exome sequencing on five previously reported cases identified PIGL, the de-N-acetylase required for glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor formation, as a strong candidate. Furthermore, cell lines derived from these cases had significantly reduced levels of the two GPI anchor markers, CD59 and a GPI-binding toxin, aerolysin (FLAER), confirming the pathogenicity of the mutations.
22503632	SHANK1 Deletions in Males with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Recent studies have highlighted the involvement of rare (<1% frequency) copy-number variations and point mutations in the genetic etiology of autism spectrum disorder (ASD); these variants particularly affect genes involved in the neuronal synaptic complex. The SHANK gene family consists of three members (SHANK1, SHANK2, and SHANK3), which encode scaffolding proteins required for the proper formation and function of neuronal synapses. Although SHANK2 and SHANK3 mutations have been implicated in ASD and intellectual disability, the involvement of SHANK1 is unknown. Here, we assess microarray data from 1,158 Canadian and 456 European individuals with ASD to discover microdeletions at the SHANK1 locus on chromosome 19. We identify a hemizygous SHANK1 deletion that segregates in a four-generation family in which male carriers--but not female carriers--have ASD with higher functioning. A de novo SHANK1 deletion was also detected in an unrelated male individual with ASD with higher functioning, and no equivalent SHANK1 mutations were found in >15,000 controls (p = 0.009). The discovery of apparent reduced penetrance of ASD in females bearing inherited autosomal SHANK1 deletions provides a possible contributory model for the male gender bias in autism. The data are also informative for clinical-genetics interpretations of both inherited and sporadic forms of ASD involving SHANK1.
23122590	Linkage-disequilibrium-based binning misleads the interpretation of genome-wide association studies.
22265016	RHBDF2 mutations are associated with tylosis, a familial esophageal cancer syndrome. Tylosis esophageal cancer (TOC) is an autosomal-dominant syndrome characterized by palmoplantar keratoderma, oral precursor lesions, and a high lifetime risk of esophageal cancer. We have previously localized the TOC locus to a small genomic interval within chromosomal region 17q25. Using a targeted capture array and next-generation sequencing, we have now identified missense mutations (c.557T>C [p.Ile186Thr] and c.566C>T [p.Pro189Leu] in RHBDF2, which encodes the inactive rhomboid protease RHBDF2 (also known as iRhom2), as the underlying cause of TOC. We show that the distribution of RHBDF2 in tylotic skin is altered in comparison with that in normal skin, and immortalized tylotic keratinocytes have decreased levels of total epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and display an increased proliferative and migratory potential relative to normal cells, even when normal cells are stimulated with exogenous epidermal growth factor. It would thus appear that EGFR signaling is dysregulated in tylotic cells. Furthermore, we also show an altered localization of RHBDF2 in both tylotic and sporadic squamous esophageal tumors. The elucidation of a role of RHBDF2 in growth-factor signaling in esophageal cancer will help to determine whether targeting this pathway in chemotherapy for this and other squamous cell carcinomas will be effective.
23159251	An exponential combination procedure for set-based association tests in sequencing studies. State-of-the-art next-generation-sequencing technologies can facilitate in-depth explorations of the human genome by investigating both common and rare variants. For the identification of genetic factors that are associated with disease risk or other complex phenotypes, methods have been proposed for jointly analyzing variants in a set (e.g., all coding SNPs in a gene). Variants in a properly defined set could be associated with risk or phenotype in a concerted fashion, and by accumulating information from them, one can improve power to detect genetic risk factors. Many set-based methods in the literature are based on statistics that can be written as the summation of variant statistics. Here, we propose taking the summation of the exponential of variant statistics as the set summary for association testing. From both Bayesian and frequentist perspectives, we provide theoretical justification for taking the sum of the exponential of variant statistics because it is particularly powerful for sparse alternatives-that is, compared with the large number of variants being tested in a set, only relatively few variants are associated with disease risk-a distinctive feature of genetic data. We applied the exponential combination gene-based test to a sequencing study in anticancer pharmacogenomics and uncovered mechanistic insights into genes and pathways related to chemotherapeutic susceptibility for an important class of oncologic drugs.
22795537	De novo mutations in MLL cause Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. Excessive growth of terminal hair around the elbows (hypertrichosis cubiti) has been reported both in isolation and in association with a variable spectrum of associated phenotypic features. We identified a cohort of six individuals with hypertrichosis cubiti associated with short stature, intellectual disability, and a distinctive facial appearance, consistent with a diagnosis of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome (WSS). Utilizing a whole-exome sequencing approach, we identified de novo mutations in MLL in five of the six individuals. MLL encodes a histone methyltransferase that regulates chromatin-mediated transcription through the catalysis of methylation of histone H3K4. Each of the five mutations is predicted to result in premature termination of the protein product. Furthermore, we demonstrate that transcripts arising from the mutant alleles are subject to nonsense-mediated decay. These findings define the genetic basis of WSS, provide additional evidence for the role of haploinsufficency of histone-modification enzymes in multiple-congenital-anomaly syndromes, and further illustrate the importance of the regulation of histone modification in development.
22770979	Presence of multiple independent effects in risk loci of common complex human diseases. Many genetic loci and SNPs associated with many common complex human diseases and traits are now identified. The total genetic variance explained by these loci for a trait or disease, however, has often been very small. Much of the "missing heritability" has been revealed to be hidden in the genome among the large number of variants with small effects. Several recent studies have reported the presence of multiple independent SNPs and genetic heterogeneity in trait-associated loci. It is therefore reasonable to speculate that such a phenomenon could be common among loci known to be associated with a complex trait or disease. For testing this hypothesis, a total of 117 loci known to be associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Crohn disease (CD), type 1 diabetes (T1D), or type 2 diabetes (T2D) were selected. The presence of multiple independent effects was assessed in the case-control samples genotyped by the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium study and imputed with SNP genotype information from the HapMap Project and the 1000 Genomes Project. Eleven loci with evidence of multiple independent effects were identified in the study, and the number was expected to increase at larger sample sizes and improved statistical power. The variance explained by the multiple effects in a locus was much higher than the variance explained by the single reported SNP effect. The results thus significantly improve our understanding of the allelic structure of these individual disease-associated loci, as well as our knowledge of the general genetic mechanisms of common complex traits and diseases.
22365152	De novo pathogenic SCN8A mutation identified by whole-genome sequencing of a family quartet affected by infantile epileptic encephalopathy and SUDEP. Individuals with severe, sporadic disorders of infantile onset represent an important class of disease for which discovery of the underlying genetic architecture is not amenable to traditional genetic analysis. Full-genome sequencing of affected individuals and their parents provides a powerful alternative strategy for gene discovery. We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) on a family quartet containing an affected proband and her unaffected parents and sibling. The 15-year-old female proband had a severe epileptic encephalopathy consisting of early-onset seizures, features of autism, intellectual disability, ataxia, and sudden unexplained death in epilepsy. We discovered a de novo heterozygous missense mutation (c.5302A>G [p.Asn1768Asp]) in the voltage-gated sodium-channel gene SCN8A in the proband. This mutation alters an evolutionarily conserved residue in Nav1.6, one of the most abundant sodium channels in the brain. Analysis of the biophysical properties of the mutant channel demonstrated a dramatic increase in persistent sodium current, incomplete channel inactivation, and a depolarizing shift in the voltage dependence of steady-state fast inactivation. Current-clamp analysis in hippocampal neurons transfected with p.Asn1768Asp channels revealed increased spontaneous firing, paroxysmal-depolarizing-shift-like complexes, and an increased firing frequency, consistent with a dominant gain-of-function phenotype in the heterozygous proband. This work identifies SCN8A as the fifth sodium-channel gene to be mutated in epilepsy and demonstrates the value of WGS for the identification of pathogenic mutations causing severe, sporadic neurological disorders.
22405084	2011 William Allan Award: development and evolution.
22703880	Spinal muscular atrophy associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy is caused by mutations in ASAH1. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease characterized by the degeneration of lower motor neurons. The most frequent form is linked to mutations in SMN1. Childhood SMA associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME) has been reported as a rare autosomal-recessive condition unlinked to mutations in SMN1. Through linkage analysis, homozygosity mapping, and exome sequencing in three unrelated SMA-PME-affected families, we identified a homozygous missense mutation (c.125C>T [p.Thr42Met]) in exon 2 of ASAH1 in the affected children of two families and the same mutation associated with a deletion of the whole gene in the third family. Expression studies of the c.125C>T mutant cDNA in Farber fibroblasts showed that acid-ceramidase activity was only 32% of that generated by normal cDNA. This reduced activity was able to normalize the ceramide level in Farber cells, raising the question of the pathogenic mechanism underlying the CNS involvement in deficient cells. Morpholino knockdown of the ASAH1 ortholog in zebrafish led to a marked loss of motor-neuron axonal branching, a loss that is associated with increased apoptosis in the spinal cord. Our results reveal a wide phenotypic spectrum associated with ASAH1 mutations. An acid-ceramidase activity below 10% results in Farber disease, an early-onset disease starting with subcutaneous lipogranulomata, joint pain, and hoarseness of the voice, whereas a higher residual activity might be responsible for SMA-PME, a later-onset phenotype restricted to the CNS and starting with lower-motor-neuron disease.
22503634	Genetic adaptation of fatty-acid metabolism: a human-specific haplotype increasing the biosynthesis of long-chain omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. Omega-3 and omega-6 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs) are essential for the development and function of the human brain. They can be obtained directly from food, e.g., fish, or synthesized from precursor molecules found in vegetable oils. To determine the importance of genetic variability to fatty-acid biosynthesis, we studied FADS1 and FADS2, which encode rate-limiting enzymes for fatty-acid conversion. We performed genome-wide genotyping (n = 5,652 individuals) and targeted resequencing (n = 960 individuals) of the FADS region in five European population cohorts. We also analyzed available genomic data from human populations, archaic hominins, and more distant primates. Our results show that present-day humans have two common FADS haplotypes-defined by 28 closely linked SNPs across 38.9 kb-that differ dramatically in their ability to generate LC-PUFAs. No independent effects on FADS activity were seen for rare SNPs detected by targeted resequencing. The more efficient, evolutionarily derived haplotype appeared after the lineage split leading to modern humans and Neanderthals and shows evidence of positive selection. This human-specific haplotype increases the efficiency of synthesizing essential long-chain fatty acids from precursors and thereby might have provided an advantage in environments with limited access to dietary LC-PUFAs. In the modern world, this haplotype has been associated with lifestyle-related diseases, such as coronary artery disease.
22770981	HOXB1 founder mutation in humans recapitulates the phenotype of Hoxb1-/- mice. Members of the highly conserved homeobox (HOX) gene family encode transcription factors that confer cellular and tissue identities along the antero-posterior axis of mice and humans. We have identified a founder homozygous missense mutation in HOXB1 in two families from a conservative German American population. The resulting phenotype includes bilateral facial palsy, hearing loss, and strabismus and correlates extensively with the previously reported Hoxb1(-/-) mouse phenotype. The missense variant is predicted to result in the substitution of a cysteine for an arginine at amino acid residue 207 (Arg207Cys), which corresponds to the highly conserved Arg5 of the homeodomain. Arg5 interacts with thymine in the minor groove of DNA through hydrogen bonding and electrostatic attraction. Molecular modeling and an in vitro DNA-protein binding assay predict that the mutation would disrupt these interactions, destabilize the HOXB1:PBX1:DNA complex, and alter HOXB1 transcriptional activity.
23122587	Mutations of the gene encoding otogelin are a cause of autosomal-recessive nonsyndromic moderate hearing impairment. Already 40 genes have been identified for autosomal-recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment (arNSHI); however, many more genes are still to be identified. In a Dutch family segregating arNSHI, homozygosity mapping revealed a 2.4 Mb homozygous region on chromosome 11 in p15.1-15.2, which partially overlapped with the previously described DFNB18 locus. However, no putative pathogenic variants were found in USH1C, the gene mutated in DFNB18 hearing impairment. The homozygous region contained 12 additional annotated genes including OTOG, the gene encoding otogelin, a component of the tectorial membrane. It is thought that otogelin contributes to the stability and strength of this membrane through interaction or stabilization of its constituent fibers. The murine orthologous gene was already known to cause hearing loss when defective. Analysis of OTOG in the Dutch family revealed a homozygous 1bp deletion, c.5508delC, which leads to a shift in the reading frame and a premature stop codon, p.Ala1838ProfsX31. Further screeningof 60 unrelated probands from Spanish arNSHI families detected compound heterozygous OTOG mutations in one family, c.6347C>T (p.Pro2116Leu) and c. 6559C>T (p.Arg2187X). The missense mutation p.Pro2116Leu affects a highly conserved residue in the fourth von Willebrand factor type D domain of otogelin. The subjects with OTOG mutations have a moderate hearing impairment, which can be associated with vestibular dysfunction. The flat to shallow "U" or slightly downsloping shaped audiograms closely resembled audiograms of individuals with recessive mutations in the gene encoding -tectorin, another component of the tectorial membrane. This distinctive phenotype may represent a clue to orientate the molecular diagnosis.
22405088	Exome sequencing reveals mutations in TRPV3 as a cause of Olmsted syndrome. Olmsted syndrome (OS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by palmoplantar and periorificial keratoderma, alopecia in most cases, and severe itching. The genetic basis for OS remained unidentified. Using whole-exome sequencing of case-parents trios, we have identified a de novo missense mutation in TRPV3 that produces p.Gly573Ser in an individual with OS. Nucleotide sequencing of five additional affected individuals also revealed missense mutations in TRPV3 (which produced p.Gly573Ser in three cases and p.Gly573Cys and p.Trp692Gly in one case each). Encoding a transient receptor potential vanilloid-3 cation channel, TRPV3 is primarily expressed in the skin, hair follicles, brain, and spinal cord. In transfected HEK293 cells expressing TRPV3 mutants, much larger inward currents were recorded, probably because of the constitutive opening of the mutants. These gain-of-function mutations might lead to elevated apoptosis of keratinocytes and consequent skin hyperkeratosis in the affected individuals. Our findings suggest that TRPV3 plays essential roles in skin keratinization, hair growth, and possibly itching sensation in humans and selectively targeting TRPV3 could provide therapeutic potential for keratinization or itching-related skin disorders.
22243968	A restricted spectrum of mutations in the SMAD4 tumor-suppressor gene underlies Myhre syndrome. Myhre syndrome is a developmental disorder characterized by reduced growth, generalized muscular hypertrophy, facial dysmorphism, deafness, cognitive deficits, joint stiffness, and skeletal anomalies. Here, by performing exome sequencing of a single affected individual and coupling the results to a hypothesis-driven filtering strategy, we establish that heterozygous mutations in SMAD4, which encodes for a transducer mediating transforming growth factor  and bone morphogenetic protein signaling branches, underlie this rare Mendelian trait. Two recurrent de novo SMAD4 mutations were identified in eight unrelated subjects. Both mutations were missense changes altering Ile500 within the evolutionary conserved MAD homology 2 domain, a well known mutational hot spot in malignancies. Structural analyses suggest that the substituted residues are likely to perturb the binding properties of the mutant protein to signaling partners. Although SMAD4 has been established as a tumor suppressor gene somatically mutated in pancreatic, gastrointestinal, and skin cancers, and germline loss-of-function lesions and deletions of this gene have been documented to cause disorders that predispose individuals to gastrointestinal cancer and vascular dysplasias, the present report identifies a previously unrecognized class of mutations in the gene with profound impact on development and growth.
23122591	Response to Zhu etal.
22226083	Transient infantile hypertriglyceridemia, fatty liver, and hepatic fibrosis caused by mutated GPD1, encoding glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1. The molecular basis for primary hereditary hypertriglyceridemia has been identified in fewer than 5% of cases. Investigation of monogenic dyslipidemias has the potential to expose key metabolic pathways. We describe a hitherto unreported disease in ten individuals manifesting as moderate to severe transient childhood hypertriglyceridemia and fatty liver followed by hepatic fibrosis and the identification of the mutated gene responsible for this condition. We performed SNP array-based homozygosity mapping and found a single large continuous segment of homozygosity on chromosomal region 12q13.12. The candidate region contained 35 genes that are listed in Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) and 27 other genes. We performed candidate gene sequencing and screened both clinically affected individuals (children and adults with hypertriglyceridemia) and also a healthy cohort for mutations in GPD1, which encodes glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1. Mutation analysis revealed a homozygous splicing mutation, c.361-1G>C, which resulted in an aberrantly spliced mRNA in the ten affected individuals. This mutation is predicted to result in a truncated protein lacking essential conserved residues, including a functional site responsible for initial substrate recognition. Functional consequences of the mutation were evaluated by measuring intracellular concentrations of cholesterol and triglyceride as well as triglyceride secretion in HepG2 (hepatocellular carcinoma) human cells lines overexpressing normal and mutant GPD1 cDNA. Overexpression of mutant GPD1 in HepG2 cells, in comparison to overexpression of wild-type GPD1, resulted in increased secretion of triglycerides (p = 0.01). This finding supports the pathogenicity of the identified mutation.
22387015	Bent bone dysplasia-FGFR2 type, a distinct skeletal disorder, has deficient canonical FGF signaling. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) is a crucial regulator of bone formation during embryonic development. Both gain and loss-of-function studies in mice have shown that FGFR2 maintains a critical balance between the proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells. We have identified de novo FGFR2 mutations in a sporadically occurring perinatal lethal skeletal dysplasia characterized by poor mineralization of the calvarium, craniosynostosis, dysmorphic facial features, prenatal teeth, hypoplastic pubis and clavicles, osteopenia, and bent long bones. Histological analysis of the long bones revealed that the growth plate contained smaller hypertrophic chondrocytes and a thickened hypercellular periosteum. Four unrelated affected individuals were found to be heterozygous for missense mutations that introduce a polar amino acid into the hydrophobic transmembrane domain of FGFR2. Using diseased chondrocytes and a cell-based assay, we determined that these mutations selectively reduced plasma-membrane levels of FGFR2 and markedly diminished the receptor's responsiveness to extracellular FGF. All together, these clinical and molecular findings are separate from previously characterized FGFR2 disorders and represent a distinct skeletal dysplasia.
22521416	A truncating mutation of CEP135 causes primary microcephaly and disturbed centrosomal function. Autosomal-recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by intellectual disability, reduced brain and head size, but usually without defects in cerebral cortical architecture, and other syndromic abnormalities. MCPH is heterogeneous. The underlying genes of the seven known loci code for centrosomal proteins. We studied a family from northern Pakistan with two microcephalic children using homozygosity mapping and found suggestive linkage for regions on chromosomes 2, 4, and 9. We sequenced two positional candidate genes and identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in the gene encoding the 135kDa centrosomal protein (CEP135), located in the linkage interval on chromosome 4, in both affected children. Post hoc whole-exome sequencing corroborated this mutation's identification as the causal variant. Fibroblasts obtained from one of the patients showed multiple and fragmented centrosomes, disorganized microtubules, and reduced growth rate. Similar effects were reported after knockdown of CEP135 through RNA interference; we could provoke them also by ectopic overexpression of the mutant protein. Our findings suggest an additional locus for MCPH at HSA 4q12 (MCPH8), further strengthen the role of centrosomes in the development of MCPH, and place CEP135 among the essential components of this important organelle in particular for a normal neurogenesis.
8651275	Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency: the first inborn error of creatine metabolism in man. In two children with an accumulation of guanidinoacetate in brain and a deficiency of creatine in blood, a severe deficiency of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) activity was detected in the liver. Two mutant GAMT alleles were identified that carried a single base substitution within a 5' splice site or a 13-nt insertion and gave rise to four mutant transcripts. Three of the transcripts encode truncated polypeptides that lack a residue known to be critical for catalytic activity of GAMT. Deficiency of GAMT is the first inborn error of creatine metabolism. It causes a severe developmental delay and extrapyramidal symptoms in early infancy and is treatable by oral substitution with creatine.
8651280	Autosomal recessive Wolfram syndrome associated with an 8.5-kb mtDNA single deletion. Wolfram syndrome (MIM 222300) is characterized by optic atrophy, diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, neurosensory hearing loss, urinary tract abnormalities, and neurological dysfunction. The association of clinical manifestations in tissues and organs unrelated functionally or embryologically suggested the possibility of a mitochondrial implication in the disease, which has been demonstrated in two sporadic cases. Nonetheless, familial studies suggested an autosomal recessive mode of transmission, and recent data demonstrated linkage with markers on the short arm of human chromosome 4. The patient reported here, as well as her parents and unaffected sister, carried a heteroplasmic 8.5-kb deletion in mtDNA. The deletion accounted for 23% of mitochondrial genomes in lymphocytes from the patient and approximately 5% in the tissues studied from members of her family. The presence of the deletion in the patient in a proportion higher than in her unaffected parents suggests a putative defect in a nuclear gene that acts at the mitochondrial level.
8940265	Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (Hunter syndrome): mutation "hot spots" in the iduronate-2-sulfatase gene. Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II, Hunter syndrome) is an X-chromosomal storage disorder due to deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS). We have identified IDS mutations in a total of 31 families/patients with MPS II, of which 20 are novel and unique and a further 1 is novel but has been found in 3 unrelated patients. One of the mutations detected is of special interest as an AG-->G substitution in an intron, far apart from the coding region, is deleterious by creating a new 5'-splice-donor site that results in the inclusion of a 78-bp intronic sequence. While the distribution of gene rearrangements (deletions, insertions, and duplications) of <20 bp seems to be random over the IDS gene, the analysis of a total of 101 point mutations lying within the coding region shows that they tend to be more frequent in exons III, VIII, and IX. Forty-seven percent of the point mutations are at CpG dinucleotides, of which G:C-to-A:T transitions constitute nearly 80%. Almost all recurrent point mutations involve CpG sites. Analysis of a collective of 50 families studied in our laboratory, to date, revealed that mutations occur more frequently in male meioses (estimated male-to-female ratio between 3.76 and 6.3).
8940261	The extent, mechanism, and consequences of genetic variation, for recombination rate.
8651277	Maternally inherited cardiomyopathy and hearing loss associated with a novel mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Lys) gene (G8363A). A novel G8363A mutation in the mtDNA tRNA(Lys) gene was associated, in two unrelated families, with a syndrome consisting of encephalomyopathy, sensorineural hearing loss, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Muscle biopsies from the probands showed mitochondrial proliferation and partial defects of complexes I, III, and IV of the electron-transport chain. The G8363A mutation was very abundant (>95%) in muscle samples from the probands and was less copious in blood from 18 maternal relatives (mean 81.3% +/- 8.5%). Single-muscle-fiber analysis showed significantly higher levels of mutant genomes in cytochrome (c) oxidase-negative fibers than in cytochrome (c) oxidase-positive fibers. The mutation was not found in >200 individuals, including normal controls and patients with other mitochondrial encephalomyopathies, thus fulfilling accepted criteria for pathogenicity.
8940267	Spectrum of mutations in the COL4A5 collagen gene in X-linked Alport syndrome. Alport syndrome is a mainly X-linked hereditary disease of basement membranes that is characterized by progressive renal failure, deafness, and ocular lesions. It is associated with mutations of the COL4A5 gene located at Xq22 and encoding the alpha5 chain of type IV collagen. We have screened 48 of the 51 exons of the COL4A5 gene by SSCP analysis and have identified 64 mutations and 10 sequence variants among 131 unrelated Alport syndrome patients. This represents a mutation-detection rate of 50%. There were no hot-spot mutations and no recurrent mutations in our population. The identified mutations were 6 nonsense mutations, 12 frameshift mutations, 17 splice-site mutations, and 29 missense mutations, 27 of the latter being glycine substitutions in the collagenous domain. Two of these occurred on the same allele in one patient and segregated with the disease in the family. We showed that some of the glycine substitutions could be associated with the lack of immunological expression of the alpha3(IV)-alpha5(IV) collagen chains in the glomerular basement membrane.
8651297	Mutations and phenotype in isolated glycerol kinase deficiency. We demonstrate that isolated glycerol kinase (GK) deficiency in three families results from mutation of the Xp21 GK gene. GK mutations were detected in four patients with widely differing phenotypes. Patient 1 had a splice-site mutation causing premature termination. His general health was good despite absent GK activity, indicating that isolated GK deficiency can be silent. Patient 2 had GK deficiency and a severe phenotype involving psychomotor retardation and growth delay, bone dysplasia, and seizures, similar to the severe phenotype of one of the first described cases of GK deficiency. His younger brother, patient 3, also had GK deficiency, but so far his development has been normal. GK exon 17 was deleted in both brothers, implicating additional factors in causation of the severe phenotype of patient 2. Patient 4 had both GK deficiency with mental retardation and a GK missense mutation (D440V). Possible explanations for the phenotypic variation of these four patients include ascertainment bias; metabolic or environmental stress as a precipitating factor in revealing GK-related changes, as has previously been described in juvenile GK deficiency; and interactions with functional polymorphisms in other genes that alter the effect of GK deficiency on normal development.
8755927	Allelic loss is frequent in tuberous sclerosis kidney lesions but rare in brain lesions. Tuberous sclerosis (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by seizures, mental retardation, and hamartomatous lesions. Although hamartomas can occur in almost any organ, they are most common in the brain, kidney, heart, and skin. Allelic loss or loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in TSC lesions has previously been reported on chromosomes 16p13 and 9q34, the locations of the TSC2 and TSC1 genes, respectively, suggesting that the TSC genes act as tumor-suppressor genes. In our study, 87 lesions from 47 TSC patients were analyzed for LOH in the TSC1 and TSC2 chromosomal regions. Three findings resulted from this analysis. First, we confirmed that the TSC1 critical region is distal to D9S149. Second, we found LOH more frequently on chromosome 16p13 than on 9q34. Of the 28 patients with angiomyolipomas or rhabdomyomas, 16p13 LOH was detected in lesions from 12 (57%) of 21 informative patients, while 9q34 LOH was detected in lesions from only 1 patient (4%). This could indicate that TSC2 tumors are more likely than TSC1 tumors to require surgical resection or that TSC2 is more common than TSC1 in our patient population. It is also possible that small regions of 9q34 LOH were missed. Lastly, LOH was found in 56% of renal angiomyolipomas and cardiac rhabdomyormas but in only 4% of TSC brain lesions. This suggests that brain lesions can result from different pathogenic mechanisms than kidney and heart lesions.
8651311	Conclusion of LOD-score analysis for family data generated under two-locus models. The power to detect linkage by the LOD-score method is investigated here for diseases that depend on the effects of two genes. The classical strategy is, first, to detect a major-gene (MG) effect by segregation analysis and, second, to seek for linkage with genetic markers by the LOD-score method using the MG parameters. We already showed that segregation analysis can lead to evidence for a MG effect for many two-locus models, with the estimates of the MG parameters being very different from those of the two genes involved in the disease. We show here that use of these MG parameter estimates in the LOD-score analysis may lead to a failure to detect linkage for some two-locus models. For these models, use of the sib-pair method gives a non-negligible increase of power to detect linkage. The linkage-homogeneity test among subsamples differing for the familial disease distribution provides evidence of parameter misspecification, when the MG parameters are used. Moreover, for most of the models, use of the MG parameters in LOD-score analysis leads to a large bias in estimation of the recombination fraction and sometimes also to a rejection of linkage for the true recombination fraction. A final important point is that a strong evidence of an MG effect, obtained by segregation analysis, does not necessarily imply that linkage will be detected for at least one of the two genes, even with the true parameters and with a close informative marker.
8554049	Molecular definition of red cell Rh haplotypes by tightly linked SphI RFLPs. The Rh blood group system of human red cells contains five major antigens D, C/c, and E/e (the latter four designated "non-D") that are specified by eight gene complexes known as Rh haplotypes. In this paper, we report on the mapping of RH locus and identification of a set of SphI RFLPs that are tightly linked with the Rh structural genes. Using exon-specific probes, we have localized the SphI cleavage sites resulting in these DNA markers and derived a comprehensive map for the RH locus. It was found that the SphI fragments encompassing exons 4-7 of the Rh genes occur in four banding patterns or frameworks that correspond to the distribution and segregation of the common Rh haplotypes. This linkage disequilibrium allowed a genotype-phenotype correlation and direct determination of Rh zygosity related to the Rh-positive or Rh-negative status (D/D, D/d, and d/d). Studies on the occurrence of SphI RFLPs in a number of rare Rh variants indicated that Rh phenotypic diversity has taken place on different haplotype backgrounds and has arisen by diverse genetic mechanisms. The molecular definition of Rh haplotypes by SphI RFLP frameworks should provide a useful procedure for genetic counseling and prenatal assessment of Rh alloimmunization.
8571955	Modulation of the phenotype in dominant erythropoietic protoporphyria by a low expression of the normal ferrochelatase allele. Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) is a monogenic inherited disorder of the heme biosynthetic pathway due to ferrochelatase (FC) deficiency. EPP is generally considered to be transmitted as an autosomal dominant disease with incomplete penetrance, although autosomal recessive inheritance has been documented at the enzymatic and molecular level in some families. In the dominant form of EPP, statistical analysis of FC activities documented a significantly lower mean value in patients than in asymptomatic carriers, suggesting a more complex mode of inheritance. To account for these findings, we tested a multiallelic inheritance model in one EPP family in which the enzymatic data were compatible with this hypothesis. In this EPP family, the specific FC gene mutation was an exon 10 skipping (delta Ex10), resulting from a G deletion within the exon 10 consensus splice donor site. The segregation of all FC alleles within the family was followed using the delta Ex10 mutation and a new intragenic dimorphism (1520 C/T). mRNAs transcribed from each FC allele were then subjected to relative quantification by a primer extension assay and to absolute quantification by a ribonuclease protection assay. The data support the hypothesis that in this family the EPP phenotype results from the coinheritance of a low output normal FC allele and a mutant delta Ex10 allele.
8755923	The retrieval of ancient human DNA sequences. DNA was extracted from approximately 600-year-old human remains found at an archaeological site in the southwestern United States, and mtDNA fragments were amplified by PCR. When these fragments were sequenced directly, multiple sequences seemed to be present. From three representative individuals, DNA fragments of different lengths were quantified and short overlapping amplification products cloned. When amplifications started from <40 molecules, clones contained several different sequences. In contrast, when they were initiated by a few thousand molecules, unambiguous and reproducible results were achieved. These results show that more experimental work than is often applied is necessary to ensure that DNA sequences amplified from ancient human remains are authentic. In particular, quantitation of the numbers of amplifiable molecules is a useful tool to determine the role of contaminating contemporary molecules and PCR errors in amplifications from ancient DNA.
8755932	mtDNA sequence diversity in Africa. mtDNA sequences were determined from 241 individuals from nine ethnic groups in Africa. When they were compared with published data from other groups, it was found that the !Kung, Mbuti, and Biaka show on the order of 10 times more sequence differences between the three groups, as well as between those and the other groups (the Fulbe, Hausa, Tuareg, Songhai, Kanuri, Yoruba, Mandenka, Somali, Tukana, and Kikuyu), than these other groups do between one other. Furthermore, the pairwise sequence distributions, patterns of coalescence events, and numbers of variable positions relative to the mean sequence difference indicate that the former three groups have been of constant size over time, whereas the latter have expanded in size. We suggest that this reflects subsistence patterns in that the populations that have expanded in size are food producers whereas those that have not are hunters and gatherers.
8651286	Finding genes on the X chromosome by which homo may have become sapiens.
8554048	Fine mapping of the EDA gene: a translocation breakpoint is associated with a CpG island that is transcribed. In order to identify the gene for human X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA), a translocation breakpoint in a female with t(X;1)(q13.1;p36.3) and EDA (patient AK) was finely mapped. The EDA region contains five groups of rare-cutter restriction sites that define CpG islands. The two more centromeric of these islands are associated with transcripts of 3.5 kb and 1.8 kb. The third CpG island maps within <1 kb of the translocation breakpoint in patient AK, as indicated by a genomic rearrangement, and approximately 100 kb centromeric from another previously mapped translocation breakpoint (patient AnLy). Northern analysis with a probe from this CpG island detected an approximately 6-kb mRNA in several fetal tissues tested. An extended YAC contig of 1,200 kb with an average of fivefold coverage was constructed. The two most telomeric CpG islands map 350 kb telomeric of the two translocations. Taken together, the results suggest that the CpG island just proximal of the AK translocation breakpoint lies at the 5' end of a candidate gene for EDA.
8751870	Family study and segregation analysis of Tourette syndrome: evidence for a mixed model of inheritance. To investigate the transmission of Tourette syndrome (TS) and associated disorders within families, complex segregation analysis was performed on family study data obtained from 53 independently ascertained children and adolescents with TS and their 154 first-degree relatives. The results suggest that the susceptibility for TS is conveyed by a major locus in combination with a multifactorial background. Other models of inheritance were definitively rejected, including strictly polygenic models, all single major locus models, and mixed models with dominant and recessive major loci. The frequency of the TS susceptibility allele was estimated to be .01. The major locus accounts for over half of the phenotypic variance for TS, whereas the multifactorial background accounts for approximately 40% of phenotypic variance. Penetrance estimates suggest that all individuals homozygous for the susceptibility allele at the major locus are affected, whereas only 2.2% of males and 0.3% of females heterozygous at the major locus are affected. Of individuals affected with TS, approximately 62% are heterozygous and approximately 38% are homozygous at the major locus. While none of the families had two parents affected with TS, 19% of families had two parents affected with the broader, phenotype, which includes TS, chronic tic disorder, or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
8940284	Using the expectation or the distribution of the identity by descent for mapping quantitative trait loci under the random model. We examine the ability of four implementations of the random model to map quantitative trait loci (QTLs). The implementations use either the expectation or the distribution of the identity-by-descent value at a putative QTL and either a 2 x 1 vector of sib-pair traits or their scalar difference. When the traits of both sibs are used, there is little difference between the expectation and distribution methods, while the expectation method suffers in both precision and power when the difference between traits is used. This is consistent with the prediction that the difference between the expectation and distribution methods is inversely proportional to the amount of information available for mapping. We find, though, that the amount of information must be very low for this difference to be noticeable. This is exemplified when both marker loci are fixed. In this case, while the expectation method is powerless to detect the QTL, the distribution method can still detect the presence (but not the position) of the QTL 59% of the time (when using trait values) or 14% of the time (when using trait differences). We also note a confounding between estimates of the QTL, polygenic, and error variance. The degree of confounding is small when the vector of trait values is used but can be substantial when the expectation method and trait differences are used. We discuss this in light of the general ability of the random model to partition these components.
8644710	The age of human mutation: genealogical and linkage disequilibrium analysis of the CLN5 mutation in the Finnish population. Variant late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (vLINCL) is an autosomal recessive progressive encephalopathy of childhood enriched in the western part of Finland, with a local incidence of 1 in 1500. We recently assigned the locus for vLINCL, CLN5, to 13q21.1-q32. In the present study, the haplotype analysis of Finnish CLN5 chromosomes provides evidence that one single mutation causes vLINCL in the Finnish population. Eight microsatellite markers closely linked to the CLN5 gene on chromosome 13q were analyzed, to study identity by descent by shared haplotype analysis. One single haplotype formed by flanking markers D13S160 and D13S162 in strong linkage disequilibrium (P < .0001) was present in 81% of disease-bearing chromosomes. Allele 4 at the marker locus D13S162 was detected in 94% of disease-bearing chromosomes. To evaluate the age of the CLN5 mutation by virtue of its restricted geographical distribution, church records were used to identify the common ancestors for 18 vLINCL families diagnosed in Finland. The pedigrees of the vLINCL ancestors merged on many occasions, which also supports a single founder mutation that obviously happened 20 to 30 generations ago (i.e., approximately 500 years ago) in this isolated population. Linkage disequilibrium was detected with seven markers covering an extended genetic distance of 11 cM, which further supports the young age of the CLN5 mutation. When the results of genealogical and linkage disequilibrium studies were combined, the CLN5 gene was predicted to lie approximately 200 - 400 kb (total range 30 - 1360 kb) from the closest marker D13S162.
8651318	Detection of linkage to affective disorders in the catalogued Amish pedigrees: a reply to Pauls et al.
8751879	The genetics of traditional living: Y-chromosomal and mitochondrial lineages in the Sinai Peninsula.
18355774	SNP arrays in heterogeneous tissue: highly accurate collection of both germline and somatic genetic information from unpaired single tumor samples. SNP arrays provide reliable genotypes and can detect chromosomal aberrations at a high resolution. However, tissue heterogeneity is currently a major limitation for somatic tissue analysis. We have developed SOMATICs, an original program for accurate analysis of heterogeneous tissue samples. Fifty-four samples (42 tumors and 12 normal tissues) were processed through Illumina Beadarrays and then analyzed with SOMATICs. We demonstrate that tissue heterogeneity-related limitations not only can be overcome but can also be turned into an advantage. First, admixture of normal cells with tumor can be used as an internal reference, thereby enabling highly sensitive detection of somatic deletions without having corresponding normal tissue. Second, the presence of normal cells allows for discrimination of somatic from germline aberrations, and the proportion of cells in the tissue sample that are harboring the somatic events can be assessed. Third, relatively early versus late somatic events can also be distinguished, assuming that late events occur only in subsets of cancer cells. Finally, admixture by normal cells allows inference of germline genotypes from a cancer sample. All this information can be obtained from any cancer sample containing a proportion of 40-75% of cancer cells. SOMATICs is a ready-to-use open-source program that integrates all of these features into a simple format, comprehensively describing each chromosomal event.
19026398	Mutations in contactin-1, a neural adhesion and neuromuscular junction protein, cause a familial form of lethal congenital myopathy. We have previously reported a group of patients with congenital onset weakness associated with a deficiency of members of the syntrophin-alpha-dystrobrevin subcomplex and have demonstrated that loss of syntrophin and dystrobrevin from the sarcolemma of skeletal muscle can also be associated with denervation. Here, we have further studied four individuals from a consanguineous Egyptian family with a lethal congenital myopathy inherited in an autosomal-recessive fashion and characterized by a secondary loss of beta2-syntrophin and alpha-dystrobrevin from the muscle sarcolemma, central nervous system involvement, and fetal akinesia. We performed homozygosity mapping and candidate gene analysis and identified a mutation that segregates with disease within CNTN1, the gene encoding for the neural immunoglobulin family adhesion molecule, contactin-1. Contactin-1 transcripts were markedly decreased on gene-expression arrays of muscle from affected family members compared to controls. We demonstrate that contactin-1 is expressed at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) in mice and man in addition to the previously documented expression in the central and peripheral nervous system. In patients with secondary dystroglycanopathies, we show that contactin-1 is abnormally localized to the sarcolemma instead of exclusively at the NMJ. The cntn1 null mouse presents with ataxia, progressive muscle weakness, and postnatal lethality, similar to the affected members in this family. We propose that loss of contactin-1 from the NMJ impairs communication or adhesion between nerve and muscle resulting in the severe myopathic phenotype. This disorder is part of the continuum in the clinical spectrum of congenital myopathies and congenital myasthenic syndromes.
18394579	A mutation in HOXA2 is responsible for autosomal-recessive microtia in an Iranian family. Microtia, a congenital deformity manifesting as an abnormally shaped or absent external ear, occurs in one out of 8,000-10,000 births. We ascertained a consanguineous Iranian family segregating with autosomal-recessive bilateral microtia, mixed symmetrical severe to profound hearing impairment, and partial cleft palate. Genome-wide linkage analysis localized the responsible gene to chromosome 7p14.3-p15.3 with a maximum multi-point LOD score of 4.17. In this region, homeobox genes from the HOXA cluster were the most interesting candidates. Subsequent DNA sequence analysis of the HOXA1 and HOXA2 homeobox genes from the candidate region identified an interesting HOXA2 homeodomain variant: a change in a highly conserved amino acid (p.Q186K). The variant was not found in 231 Iranian and 109 Belgian control samples. The critical contribution of HoxA2 for auditory-system development has already been shown in mouse models. We built a homology model to predict the effect of this mutation on the structure and DNA-binding activity of the homeodomain by using the program Modeler 8v2. In the model of the mutant homeodomain, the position of the mutant lysine side chain is consistently farther away from a nearby phosphate group; this altered position results in the loss of a hydrogen bond and affects the DNA-binding activity.
18304497	Splice mutation in the iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein ISCU causes myopathy with exercise intolerance. A myopathy with severe exercise intolerance and myoglobinuria has been described in patients from northern Sweden, with associated deficiencies of succinate dehydrogenase and aconitase in skeletal muscle. We identified the gene for the iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein ISCU as a candidate within a region of shared homozygosity among patients with this disease. We found a single mutation in ISCU that likely strengthens a weak splice acceptor site, with consequent exon retention. A marked reduction of ISCU mRNA and mitochondrial ISCU protein in patient muscle was associated with a decrease in the iron regulatory protein IRP1 and intracellular iron overload in skeletal muscle, consistent with a muscle-specific alteration of iron homeostasis in this disease. ISCU interacts with the Friedreich ataxia gene product frataxin in iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis. Our results therefore extend the range of known human diseases that are caused by defects in iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis.
18460397	Differential expression of PTEN-targeting microRNAs miR-19a and miR-21 in Cowden syndrome. Germline mutations in the gene encoding phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN [MIM 601728]) are associated with a number of clinically distinct heritable cancer syndromes, including both Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). Seemingly identical pathogenic PTEN mutations have been observed in patients with CS and BRRS, as well as in patients with incomplete features of CS, referred to as CS-like (CSL) patients. These observations indicate that additional, unidentified, genetic and epigenetic factors act as phenotypic modifiers in these disorders. These genetic factors could also contribute to disease in patients with CS, CSL, or BRRS without identifiable PTEN mutations. Two potential modifiers are miR-19a and miR-21, which are previously identified PTEN-targeting miRNAs. We investigated the role of these miRNAs by characterizing their relative expression levels in PTEN-mutation-positive and PTEN-mutation-negative patients with CS, CSL, or BRRS. Interestingly, we observed differential expression of miR-19a and miR-21 in our PTEN-mutation-positive patients. Both were found to be significantly overexpressed within this group (p < 0.01) and were inversely correlated with germline PTEN protein levels. Similarly, the relative expression of miR-19a and miR-21 was differentially expressed in a series of PTEN-mutation-negative patients with CS or CSL with variable clinical phenotypes and decreased full-length PTEN protein expression. Among PTEN-mutation-positive patients with CS, both miRNAs were significantly overexpressed (p = 0.006-0.013). Taken together, our study results suggest that differential expression of PTEN-targeting miR-19a and miR-21 modulates the PTEN protein levels and the CS and CSL phenotypes, irrespective of the patient's mutation status, and support their roles as genetic modifiers in CS and CSL.
18252214	Selection against pathogenic mtDNA mutations in a stem cell population leads to the loss of the 3243A-->G mutation in blood. The mutation 3243A-->G is the most common heteroplasmic pathogenic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutation in humans, but it is not understood why the proportion of this mutation decreases in blood during life. Changing levels of mtDNA heteroplasmy are fundamentally related to the pathophysiology of the mitochondrial disease and correlate with clinical progression. To understand this process, we simulated the segregation of mtDNA in hematopoietic stem cells and leukocyte precursors. Our observations show that the percentage of mutant mtDNA in blood decreases exponentially over time. This is consistent with the existence of a selective process acting at the stem cell level and explains why the level of mutant mtDNA in blood is almost invariably lower than in nondividing (postmitotic) tissues such as skeletal muscle. By using this approach, we derived a formula from human data to correct for the change in heteroplasmy over time. A comparison of age-corrected blood heteroplasmy levels with skeletal muscle, an embryologically distinct postmitotic tissue, provides independent confirmation of the model. These findings indicate that selection against pathogenic mtDNA mutations occurs in a stem cell population.
18674750	WW-domain-containing oxidoreductase is associated with low plasma HDL-C levels. Low serum HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease. We performed targeted genotyping of a 12.4 Mb linked region on 16q to test for association with low HDL-C by using a regional-tag SNP strategy. We identified one SNP, rs2548861, in the WW-domain-containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) gene with region-wide significance for low HDL-C in dyslipidemic families of Mexican and European descent and in low-HDL-C cases and controls of European descent (p = 6.9 x 10(-7)). We extended our investigation to the population level by using two independent unascertained population-based Finnish cohorts, the cross-sectional METSIM cohort of 4,463 males and the prospective Young Finns cohort of 2,265 subjects. The combined analysis provided p = 4 x 10(-4) to 2 x 10(-5). Importantly, in the prospective cohort, we observed a significant longitudinal association of rs2548861 with HDL-C levels obtained at four different time points over 21 years (p = 0.003), and the T risk allele explained 1.5% of the variance in HDL-C levels. The rs2548861 resides in a highly conserved region in intron 8 of WWOX. Results from our in vitro reporter assay and electrophoretic mobility-shift assay demonstrate that this region functions as a cis-regulatory element whose associated rs2548861 SNP has a specific allelic effect and that the region forms an allele-specific DNA-nuclear-factor complex. In conclusion, analyses of 9,798 subjects show significant association between HDL-C and a WWOX variant with an allele-specific cis-regulatory function.
18439549	The dawn of human matrilineal diversity. The quest to explain demographic history during the early part of human evolution has been limited because of the scarce paleoanthropological record from the Middle Stone Age. To shed light on the structure of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) phylogeny at the dawn of Homo sapiens, we constructed a matrilineal tree composed of 624 complete mtDNA genomes from sub-Saharan Hg L lineages. We paid particular attention to the Khoi and San (Khoisan) people of South Africa because they are considered to be a unique relic of hunter-gatherer lifestyle and to carry paternal and maternal lineages belonging to the deepest clades known among modern humans. Both the tree phylogeny and coalescence calculations suggest that Khoisan matrilineal ancestry diverged from the rest of the human mtDNA pool 90,000-150,000 years before present (ybp) and that at least five additional, currently extant maternal lineages existed during this period in parallel. Furthermore, we estimate that a minimum of 40 other evolutionarily successful lineages flourished in sub-Saharan Africa during the period of modern human dispersal out of Africa approximately 60,000-70,000 ybp. Only much later, at the beginning of the Late Stone Age, about 40,000 ybp, did introgression of additional lineages occur into the Khoisan mtDNA pool. This process was further accelerated during the recent Bantu expansions. Our results suggest that the early settlement of humans in Africa was already matrilineally structured and involved small, separately evolving isolated populations.
18252226	Acetylcholine receptor pathway mutations explain various fetal akinesia deformation sequence disorders. Impaired fetal movement causes malformations, summarized as fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS), and is triggered by environmental and genetic factors. Acetylcholine receptor (AChR) components are suspects because mutations in the fetally expressed gamma subunit (CHRNG) of AChR were found in two FADS disorders, lethal multiple pterygium syndrome (LMPS) and Escobar syndrome. Other AChR subunits alpha1, beta1, and delta (CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND) as well as receptor-associated protein of the synapse (RAPSN) previously revealed missense or compound nonsense-missense mutations in viable congenital myasthenic syndrome; lethality of homozygous null mutations was predicted but never shown. We provide the first report to our knowledge of homozygous nonsense mutations in CHRNA1 and CHRND and show that they were lethal, whereas novel recessive missense mutations in RAPSN caused a severe but not necessarily lethal phenotype. To elucidate disease-associated malformations such as frequent abortions, fetal edema, cystic hygroma, or cardiac defects, we studied Chrna1, Chrnb1, Chrnd, Chrng, and Rapsn in mouse embryos and found expression in skeletal muscles but also in early somite development. This indicates that early developmental defects might be due to somite expression in addition to solely muscle-specific effects. We conclude that complete or severe functional disruption of fetal AChR causes lethal multiple pterygium syndrome whereas milder alterations result in fetal hypokinesia with inborn contractures or a myasthenic syndrome later in life.
18179886	Oncostatin M receptor-beta mutations underlie familial primary localized cutaneous amyloidosis. Familial primary localized cutaneous amyloidosis (FPLCA) is an autosomal-dominant disorder associated with chronic skin itching and deposition of epidermal keratin filament-associated amyloid material in the dermis. FPLCA has been mapped to 5p13.1-q11.2, and by candidate gene analysis, we identified missense mutations in the OSMR gene, encoding oncostatin M-specific receptor beta (OSMRbeta), in three families. OSMRbeta is a component of the oncostatin M (OSM) type II receptor and the interleukin (IL)-31 receptor, and cultured FPLCA keratinocytes showed reduced activation of Jak/STAT, MAPK, and PI3K/Akt pathways after OSM or IL-31 cytokine stimulation. The pathogenic amino acid substitutions are located within the extracellular fibronectin type III-like (FNIII) domains, regions critical for receptor dimerization and function. OSM and IL-31 signaling have been implicated in keratinocyte cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and inflammation, but our OSMR data in individuals with FPLCA represent the first human germline mutations in this cytokine receptor complex and provide new insight into mechanisms of skin itching.
18371931	Loss of nephrocystin-3 function can cause embryonic lethality, Meckel-Gruber-like syndrome, situs inversus, and renal-hepatic-pancreatic dysplasia. Many genetic diseases have been linked to the dysfunction of primary cilia, which occur nearly ubiquitously in the body and act as solitary cellular mechanosensory organelles. The list of clinical manifestations and affected tissues in cilia-related disorders (ciliopathies) such as nephronophthisis is broad and has been attributed to the wide expression pattern of ciliary proteins. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms leading to this dramatic diversity of phenotypes. We recently reported hypomorphic NPHP3 mutations in children and young adults with isolated nephronophthisis and associated hepatic fibrosis or tapetoretinal degeneration. Here, we chose a combinatorial approach in mice and humans to define the phenotypic spectrum of NPHP3/Nphp3 mutations and the role of the nephrocystin-3 protein. We demonstrate that the pcy mutation generates a hypomorphic Nphp3 allele that is responsible for the cystic kidney disease phenotype, whereas complete loss of Nphp3 function results in situs inversus, congenital heart defects, and embryonic lethality in mice. In humans, we show that NPHP3 mutations can cause a broad clinical spectrum of early embryonic patterning defects comprising situs inversus, polydactyly, central nervous system malformations, structural heart defects, preauricular fistulas, and a wide range of congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). On the functional level, we show that nephrocystin-3 directly interacts with inversin and can inhibit like inversin canonical Wnt signaling, whereas nephrocystin-3 deficiency leads in Xenopus laevis to typical planar cell polarity defects, suggesting a role in the control of canonical and noncanonical (planar cell polarity) Wnt signaling.
19012875	Divergence between human populations estimated from linkage disequilibrium. Observed linkage disequilibrium (LD) between genetic markers in different populations descended independently from a common ancestral population can be used to estimate their absolute time of divergence, because the correlation of LD between populations will be reduced each generation by an amount that, approximately, depends only on the recombination rate between markers. Although drift leads to divergence in allele frequencies, it has less effect on divergence in LD values. We derived the relationship between LD and time of divergence and verified it with coalescent simulations. We then used HapMap Phase II data to estimate time of divergence between human populations. Summed over large numbers of pairs of loci, we find a positive correlation of LD between African and non-African populations at levels of up to approximately 0.3 cM. We estimate that the observed correlation of LD is consistent with an effective separation time of approximately 1,000 generations or approximately 25,000 years before present. The most likely explanation for such relatively low separation times is the existence of substantial levels of migration between populations after the initial separation. Theory and results from coalescent simulations confirm that low levels of migration can lead to a downward bias in the estimate of separation time.
18179903	Mutation analysis of CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND, and RAPSN genes in multiple pterygium syndrome/fetal akinesia patients. Multiple pterygium syndromes (MPS) comprise a group of multiple congenital anomaly disorders characterized by webbing (pterygia) of the neck, elbows, and/or knees and joint contractures (arthrogryposis). MPS are phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous but are traditionally divided into prenatally lethal and nonlethal (Escobar) types. Previously, we and others reported that recessive mutations in the embryonal acetylcholine receptor g subunit (CHRNG) can cause both lethal and nonlethal MPS, thus demonstrating that pterygia resulted from fetal akinesia. We hypothesized that mutations in acetylcholine receptor-related genes might also result in a MPS/fetal akinesia phenotype and so we analyzed 15 cases of lethal MPS/fetal akinesia without CHRNG mutations for mutations in the CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND, and rapsyn (RAPSN) genes. No CHRNA1, CHRNB1, or CHRND mutations were detected, but a homozygous RAPSN frameshift mutation, c.1177-1178delAA, was identified in a family with three children affected with lethal fetal akinesia sequence. Previously, RAPSN mutations have been reported in congenital myasthenia. Functional studies were consistent with the hypothesis that whereas incomplete loss of rapsyn function may cause congenital myasthenia, more severe loss of function can result in a lethal fetal akinesia phenotype.
18950739	The Human Phenotype Ontology: a tool for annotating and analyzing human hereditary disease. There are many thousands of hereditary diseases in humans, each of which has a specific combination of phenotypic features, but computational analysis of phenotypic data has been hampered by lack of adequate computational data structures. Therefore, we have developed a Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) with over 8000 terms representing individual phenotypic anomalies and have annotated all clinical entries in Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man with the terms of the HPO. We show that the HPO is able to capture phenotypic similarities between diseases in a useful and highly significant fashion.
18656178	A comparative analysis of the genetic epidemiology of deafness in the United States in two sets of pedigrees collected more than a century apart. In 1898, E.A. Fay published an analysis of nearly 5000 marriages among deaf individuals in America collected during the 19(th) century. Each pedigree included three-generation data on marriage partners that included at least one deaf proband, who were ascertained by complete selection. We recently proposed that the intense phenotypic assortative mating among the deaf might have greatly accelerated the normally slow response to relaxed genetic selection against deafness that began in many Western countries with the introduction of sign language and the establishment of residential schools. Simulation studies suggest that this mechanism might have doubled the frequency of the commonest forms of recessive deafness (DFNB1) in this country during the past 200 years. To test this prediction, we collected pedigree data on 311 contemporary marriages among deaf individuals that were comparable to those collected by Fay. Segregation analysis of the resulting data revealed that the estimated proportion of noncomplementary matings that can produce only deaf children has increased by a factor of more than five in the past 100 years. Additional analysis within our sample of contemporary pedigrees showed that there was a statistically significant linear increase in the prevalence of pathologic GJB2 mutations when the data on 441 probands were partitioned into three 20-year birth cohorts (1920 through 1980). These data are consistent with the increase in the frequency of DFNB1 predicted by our previous simulation studies and provide convincing evidence for the important influence that assortative mating can have on the frequency of common genes for deafness.
18179885	Independent introduction of two lactase-persistence alleles into human populations reflects different history of adaptation to milk culture. The T(-13910) variant located in the enhancer element of the lactase (LCT) gene correlates perfectly with lactase persistence (LP) in Eurasian populations whereas the variant is almost nonexistent among Sub-Saharan African populations, showing high prevalence of LP. Here, we report identification of two new mutations among Saudis, also known for the high prevalence of LP. We confirmed the absence of the European T(-13910) and established two new mutations found as a compound allele: T/G(-13915) within the -13910 enhancer region and a synonymous SNP in the exon 17 of the MCM6 gene T/C(-3712), -3712 bp from the LCT gene. The compound allele is driven to a high prevalence among Middle East population(s). Our functional analyses in vitro showed that both SNPs of the compound allele, located 10 kb apart, are required for the enhancer effect, most probably mediated through the binding of the hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1 alpha). High selection coefficient (s) approximately 0.04 for LP phenotype was found for both T(-13910) and the compound allele. The European T(-13910) and the earlier identified East African G(-13907) LP allele share the same ancestral background and most likely the same history, probably related to the same cattle domestication event. In contrast, the compound Arab allele shows a different, highly divergent ancestral haplotype, suggesting that these two major global LP alleles have arisen independently, the latter perhaps in response to camel milk consumption. These results support the convergent evolution of the LP in diverse populations, most probably reflecting different histories of adaptation to milk culture.
18308288	Genome-wide high-density SNP-based linkage analysis of infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis identifies loci on chromosomes 11q14-q22 and Xq23. Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHPS) has an incidence of 1-8 per 1000 live births and is inherited as a complex sex-modified multifactorial trait with a striking male preponderance. Syndromic and monogenic forms exist, and two loci have been identified. Infants present with vomiting due to gastric-outlet obstruction caused by hypertrophy of the smooth muscle of the pylorus. A genome-wide SNP-based high-density linkage scan was carried out on 81 IHPS pedigrees. Nonparametric and parametric linkage analysis identified loci on chromosomes 11q14-q22 (Z(max) = 3.9, p < 0.0001; HLOD(max) = 3.4, alpha = 0.34) and Xq23 (Z(max) = 4.3, p < 0.00001; HLOD(max) = 4.8, alpha = 0.56). The two linked chromosomal regions each harbor functional candidate genes that are members of the canonical transient receptor potential (TRPC) family of ion channels and have a potential role in smooth-muscle control and hypertrophy.
18423522	Estimating odds ratios in genome scans: an approximate conditional likelihood approach. In modern whole-genome scans, the use of stringent thresholds to control the genome-wide testing error distorts the estimation process, producing estimated effect sizes that may be on average far greater in magnitude than the true effect sizes. We introduce a method, based on the estimate of genetic effect and its standard error as reported by standard statistical software, to correct for this bias in case-control association studies. Our approach is widely applicable, is far easier to implement than competing approaches, and may often be applied to published studies without access to the original data. We evaluate the performance of our approach via extensive simulations for a range of genetic models, minor allele frequencies, and genetic effect sizes. Compared to the naive estimation procedure, our approach reduces the bias and the mean squared error, especially for modest effect sizes. We also develop a principled method to construct confidence intervals for the genetic effect that acknowledges the conditioning on statistical significance. Our approach is described in the specific context of odds ratios and logistic modeling but is more widely applicable. Application to recently published data sets demonstrates the relevance of our approach to modern genome scans.
18387595	On the replication of genetic associations: timing can be everything! The failure of researchers to replicate genetic-association findings is most commonly attributed to insufficient statistical power, population stratification, or various forms of between-study heterogeneity or environmental influences.(1) Here, we illustrate another potential cause for nonreplications that has so far not received much attention in the literature. We illustrate that the strength of a genetic effect can vary by age, causing "age-varying associations." If not taken into account during the design and the analysis of a study, age-varying genetic associations can cause nonreplication. By using the 100K SNP scan of the Framingham Heart Study, we identified an age-varying association between a SNP in ROBO1 and obesity and hypothesized an age-gene interaction. This finding was followed up in eight independent samples comprising 13,584 individuals. The association was replicated in five of the eight studies, showing an age-dependent relationship (one-sided combined p = 3.92 x 10(-9), combined p value from pediatric cohorts = 2.21 x 10(-8), combined p value from adult cohorts = 0.00422). Furthermore, this study illustrates that it is difficult for cross-sectional study designs to detect age-varying associations. If the specifics of age- or time-varying genetic effects are not considered in the selection of both the follow-up samples and in the statistical analysis, important genetic associations may be missed.
18452888	Deleterious mutations in the Zinc-Finger 469 gene cause brittle cornea syndrome. Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) is an autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by a thin cornea that tends to perforate, causing progressive visual loss and blindness. Additional systemic symptoms such as joint hypermotility, hyperlaxity of the skin, and kyphoscoliosis place BCS among the connective-tissue disorders. Previously, we assigned the disease gene to a 4.7 Mb interval on chromosome 16q24. In order to clone the BCS gene, we first narrowed the disease locus to a 2.8 Mb interval and systematically sequenced genes expressed in connective tissue in this chromosomal segment. We have identified two frameshift mutations in the Zinc-Finger 469 gene (ZNF469). In five unrelated patients of Tunisian Jewish ancestry, we found a 1 bp deletion at position 5943 (5943 delA), and in an inbred Palestinian family we detected a single-nucleotide deletion at position 9527 (9527 delG). The function of ZNF469 is unknown. However, a 30% homology to a number of collagens suggests that it could act as a transcription factor involved in the synthesis and/or organization of collagen fibers.
1539591	A truncated dystrophin lacking the C-terminal domains is localized at the muscle membrane. A Duchenne muscular dystrophy patient who displayed near-normal dystrophin staining at the sarcolemma with N-terminal, but not with C-terminal, anti-dystrophin monoclonal antibodies was found to have a frameshift deletion of exons 42 and 43. This deletion introduces an early termination codon, and a 225-kD protein was detected by western blotting with N-terminal antibodies only. The results suggest that an N-terminal truncated dystrophin fragment encoded by exon 1-41 is able to associate with the muscle cell membrane. The current idea that the C-terminal domains of dystrophin are important or essential for its integration with the sarcolemma may have to be reexamined in the light of these observations.
1346075	Mechanisms of ring chromosome formation in 11 cases of human ring chromosome 21. We studied the mechanism of ring chromosome 21 (r(21)) formation in 13 patients (11 unique r(21)s), consisting of 7 from five families with familial r(21) and 6 with de novo r(21). The copy number of chromosome 21 sequences in the rings of these patients was determined by quantitative dosage analyses for 13 loci on 21q. Nine of 11 r(21)s, including the 5 familial r(21)s, showed no evidence for duplication of 21q sequences but did show molecular evidence of partial deletion of 21q. These data were consistent with the breakage and reunion of short- and long-arm regions to form the r(21), resulting in deletion of varying amounts of 21q22.1 to 21qter. The data from one individual who had a Down syndrome phenotype were consistent with asymmetric breakage and reunion of 21q sequences from an intermediate isochromosome or Robertsonian translocation chromosome as reported by Wong et al. Another patient, who also exhibited Down syndrome, showed evidence of a third mechanism of ring formation. The likely initial event was breakage and reunion of the short and long arms, resulting in a small r(21), followed by a sister-chromatid exchange resulting in a double-sized and symmetrically dicentric r(21). The phenotype of patients correlated well with the extent of deletion or duplication of chromosome 21 sequences. These data demonstrate three mechanisms of r(21) formation and show that the phenotype of r(21) patients varies with the extent of chromosome 21 monosomy or trisomy.
1609807	Anticipation legitimized: unstable DNA to the rescue.
1415265	Molecular genetic study of the frequency of monosomy 22q11 in DiGeorge syndrome. It is well established that DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) may be associated with monosomy of 22q11-pter. More recently, DNA probes have been used to detect hemizygosity for this region in patients with no visible karyotypic abnormality. However, DGS has also been described in cases where the cytogenetic abnormality does not involve 22q11; for instance, four cases of 10p- have been reported. In this study we have prospectively analyzed patients, by using DNA markers from 22q11, to assess the frequency of 22q11 rearrangements in DGS. Twenty-one of 22 cases had demonstrable hemizygosity for 22q11. Cytogenetic analysis had identified interstitial deletion in 6 of 16 cases tested; in 6 other cases no karyotype was available. When these results are combined with those from our previous studies, 33 of 35 DGS patients had chromosome 22q11 deletions detectable by DNA probes.
1329505	SSCP and segregation analysis of the human type X collagen gene (COL10A1) in heritable forms of chondrodysplasia. Type X collagen is a homotrimeric, short chain, nonfibrillar collagen that is expressed exclusively by hypertrophic chondrocytes at the sites of endochondral ossification. The distribution and pattern of expression of the type X collagen gene (COL10A1) suggests that mutations altering the structure and synthesis of the protein may be responsible for causing heritable forms of chondrodysplasia. We investigated whether mutations within the human COL10A1 gene were responsible for causing the disorders achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia, pseudoachondroplasia, and thanatophoric dysplasia, by analyzing the coding regions of the gene by using PCR and the single-stranded conformational polymorphism technique. By this approach, seven sequence changes were identified within and flanking the coding regions of the gene of the affected persons. We demonstrated that six of these sequence changes were not responsible for causing these forms of chondrodysplasia but were polymorphic in nature. The sequence changes were used to demonstrate discordant segregation between the COL10A1 locus and achondroplasia and pseudoachondroplasia, in nuclear families. This lack of segregation suggests that mutations within or near the COL10A1 locus are not responsible for these disorders. The seventh sequence change resulted in a valine-to-methionine substitution in the carboxyl-terminal domain of the molecule and was identified in only two hypochondroplasic individuals from a single family. Segregation analysis in this family was inconclusive, and the significance of this substitution remains uncertain.
1609795	The human gene encoding acetylcholinesterase is located on the long arm of chromosome 7. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is a secreted enzyme essential for regulating cholinergic neurotransmission at neuronal and neuromuscular synapses. In view of the altered expression of AChE in some central neurological and neuromuscular disorders with a probable genetic basis, we have identified the chromosomal location of the gene encoding AChE. Chromosomal in situ suppression hybridization analysis revealed a single gene to be at 7q22, a result which was confirmed by PCR analysis of genomic DNA from a human/hamster somatic cell hybrid containing a single human chromosome 7. The AChE gene thus maps to the same region in which frequent nonrandom chromosome 7 deletions occur in leukemias of myeloid cell precursors known to express the enzyme during normal differentiation.
1357966	Linkage disequilibrium among RFLPs at the insulin-receptor locus despite intervening Alu repeat sequences. Multiple mutations of the insulin receptor (INSR) gene have been identified in individuals with extreme insulin resistance. These mutations have included recombination events between Alu repeat units in the tyrosine kinase-encoding beta-chain region of the gene. To evaluate the influence of Alu and dinucleotide repetitive sequences on recombination events within the insulin receptor gene, I examined the degree of linkage disequilibrium between RFLP pairs spanning the gene. I established 228 independent haplotypes for seven RFLPs (two each for PstI, RsaI, and SstI and one for MspI and 172 independent haplotypes which included an additional RFLP with BglII) from 19 pedigrees. These RFLPs span > 130 kb of this gene, and my colleagues and I previously demonstrated that multiple Alu sequences separate RFLP pairs. Observed haplotype frequencies deviated significantly from those predicted. Pairwise analysis of RFLP showed high levels of linkage disequilibrium among RFLP in the beta-chain region of the insulin receptor, but not between alpha-chain RFLPs and those of the beta-chain. Disequilibrium was present among beta-chain RFLPs, despite separation by one or more Alu repeat sequences. The very strong linkage disequilibrium which was present in sizable regions of the INSR gene despite the presence of both Alu and microsatellite repeats suggested that these regions do not have a major impact on recombinations at this locus.
1729895	Decreased fecundability in Hutterite couples sharing HLA-DR. To study the effects of parental HLA sharing on pregnancy outcome, we initiated population-based studies in the Hutterites. We previously reported longer intervals from marriage to each birth among couples sharing HLA, particularly HLA-DR. In the present report, we present the results of a prospective, 5-year study of fecundability and fetal loss rates in this population. Between April 1986 and April 1991, 154 pregnancies were observed in 104 couples. The median number of months of unprotected intercourse to a positive pregnancy test was significantly longer among couples sharing HLA-DR who stopped nursing prior to the first menses as compared with couples not sharing HLA-DR who stopped nursing prior to the first menses (5.1 vs. 2.0 mo, respectively; P = .016). Fetal loss rates were increased among couples sharing HLA-B as compared with couples not sharing HLA-B (.23 vs. .12, respectively; P = .041, adjusted for age, gravidity, and kinship). These data suggest that our earlier observations of increased birth interval lengths among Hutterite couples sharing HLA were predominantly due to longer intervals until a clinical pregnancy among couples sharing HLA-DR and, to a lesser degree, were due to increased fetal loss rates among couples sharing HLA-B.
1463020	Importance sampling. I. Computing multimodel p values in linkage analysis. In linkage analysis, when the lod score is maximized over multiple genetic models, standard asymptotic approximation of the significance level does not apply. Monte Carlo methods can be used to estimate the p value, but procedures currently used are extremely inefficient. We propose a Monte Carlo procedure based on the concept of importance sampling, which can be thousands of times more efficient than current procedures. With a reasonable amount of computing time, extremely accurate estimates of the p values can be obtained. Both theoretical results and an example of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) are presented to illustrate the efficiency performance of our method. Relations between single-model and multimodel p values are explored. The new procedure is also used to investigate the performance of asymptotic approximations in a single model situation.
1317992	Increased genetic instability of the common fragile site at 3p14 after integration of exogenous DNA. We determined previously that the selectable marker pSV2neo is preferentially inserted into chromosomal fragile sites in human x hamster hybrid cells in the presence of an agent (aphidicolin) that induces fragile-site expression. In contrast, cells transfected without fragile-site induction showed an essentially random integration pattern. To determine whether the integration of marker DNA at fragile sites affects the frequency of fragile-site expression, the parental hybrid and three transfectants (two with pSV2neo integrated at the fragile site at 3p14.2 [FRA3B] and specific hamster fragile sites [chromosome 1, bands q26-31, or mar2, bands q11-13] and one with pSV2neo integrated at sites that are not fragile sites) were treated with aphidicolin. After 24 h the two cell lines with plasmid integration at FRA3B showed structural rearrangements at that site; these rearrangements accounted for 43%-67% of the total deletions and translocations observed. Structural rearrangements were not observed in the parental cell line. After 5 d aphidicolin treatment, the observed excess in frequency of structural rearrangements at FRA3B in the cell lines with pSV2neo integration at 3p14 over that in the two lines without FRA3B integration was less dramatic, but nonetheless significant. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of these cells, using a biotin-labeled pSV2neo probe, showed results consistent with the gross rearrangements detected cytogenetically in the lines with FRA3B integration; however, the pSV2neo sequences were frequently deleted concomitantly with translocations.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
1346482	Isolation and characterization of new highly polymorphic DNA markers from the Huntington disease region. The defect causing Huntington disease (HD) has been mapped to 4p16.3, distal to the DNA marker D4S10. Subsequently, additional polymorphic markers closer to the HD gene have been isolated, which has led to the establishment of predictive testing programs for individuals at risk for HD. Approximately 17% of persons presenting to the Canadian collaborative study for predictive testing for HD have not received any modification of risk, in part because of limited informativeness of currently available DNA markers. Therefore, more highly polymorphic DNA markers are needed, which will further increase the accuracy and availability of predictive testing, specifically for families with complex or incomplete pedigree structures. In addition, new markers are urgently needed in order to refine the breakpoints in the few known recombinant HD chromosomes, which could allow a more accurate localization of the HD gene within 4p16.3 and, therefore, accelerate the cloning of the disease gene. In this study we present the identification and characterization of nine new polymorphic DNA markers, including three markers which detect highly informative multiallelic VNTR-like polymorphisms with PIC values of up to .84. These markers have been isolated from a cloned region of DNA which has been previously mapped approximately 1,000 kb from the 4p telomere.
1373934	Identification of a nonframeshift 84-bp deletion in exon 13 of the cystic fibrosis gene. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most frequent autosomal recessive inherited disorder in Caucasian populations. The disease is caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. We have identified an 84-bp deletion in exon 13 of the CFTR gene, detected by DNA amplification and direct sequencing of 500 bp of the 5' end of exon 13. The deletion was in the maternal allele of a CF patient bearing the delta F508 deletion in the father's allele. The same 84-bp deletion could also be detected in the patient's mother. The deletion spanned from a four-A cluster in positions 1949-1952 to another four-A cluster in positions 2032-2035, including 84 bp which correspond to codons 607-634 (1949del84). The reported mutation would result in the loss of 28 amino acid residues of the R domain of the CFTR protein.
1347972	Identification of heterogeneous PrP gene deletions in controls by detection of allele-specific heteroduplexes (DASH)
1570829	Familial case with sequence variant in the testis-determining region associated with two sex phenotypes. The human Y chromosome encodes a testis-determining factor (TDF) which is responsible for initiating male sex determination. Recently a region of the Y chromosome (SRY) was identified as part of the TDF gene. We have identified a three-generation family (N) in which all XY individuals have a single base-pair substitution resulting in a conservative amino acid change in the conserved domain of the SRY open reading frame. Three individuals are XY sex-reversed females, and two are XY males. Several models are proposed to explain association between a sequence variant in SRY and two sex phenotypes.
1598916	Uniparental disomy 15 resulting from "correction" of an initial trisomy 15.
1415242	A problem-based learning approach to teaching medical genetics. A newly developed problem-based medical genetics course that was integrated into the fourth-year medical school curriculum of the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio is described. To provide a basic genetic background for the clinical rotations, a supplemental computer tutorial is required during the second year. These two formats prepare the medical students to recognize genetic diseases, to provide basic genetic counseling in their daily practice, and to appropriately refer patients to genetic specialists.
1598907	A missense mutation (Trp86----Arg) in exon 3 of the lipoprotein lipase gene: a cause of familial chylomicronemia. We have investigated a patient of English ancestry with familial chylomicronemia caused by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency. DNA sequence analysis of all exons and intron-exon boundaries of the LPL gene identified two single-base mutations, a T----C transition for codon 86 (TGG) at nucleotide 511, resulting in a Trp86----Arg substitution, and a C----T transition at nucleotide 571, involving the codon CAG encoding Gln106 and producing Gln106----Stop, a mutation described by Emi et al. The functional significance of the two mutations was confirmed by in vitro expression and enzyme activity assays of the mutant LPL. Linkage analysis established that the patient is a compound heterozygote for the two mutations. The Trp86----Arg mutation in exon 3 is the first natural mutation identified outside exons 4-6, which encompass the catalytic triad residues.
1642234	Mode of inheritance of nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate: a reanalysis. Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL +/- P) is traditionally recognized as a multifactorial threshold trait (MFT). Recently, however, evidence for the involvement of a major gene in the etiology of CL +/- P has been reported. To assess the potential for major-gene involvement in the etiology of this trait, familial recurrence patterns from several family studies of CL +/- P were reanalyzed. The recurrence patterns in first-degree relatives of CL +/- P probands were found to be compatible with the expectations for either an MFT or a generalized single-major-locus (gSML) trait. The use of multiple thresholds based on proband sex, defect bilaterality, or palatal involvement did not help to discriminate between these models. However, the pattern of recurrence among MZ twins and more remote relatives of CL +/- P probands is not consistent with gSML inheritance but is compatible with either an MFT model or a model specifying multiple interacting loci. For such a model, no single locus can account for more than a sixfold increase in risk to first-degree relatives. These findings have important implications with regard to the feasibility of detecting linkage to loci conferring susceptibility to CL +/- P.
1415228	The tyrosinase-positive oculocutaneous albinism locus maps to chromosome 15q11.2-q12. Tyrosinase-positive oculocutaneous albinism (ty-pos OCA), an autosomal recessive disorder of the melanin biosynthetic pathway, is the most common type of albinism occurring worldwide. In southern African Bantu-speaking negroids it has an overall prevalence of about 1/3,900. Since the basic biochemical defect is unknown, a linkage study with candidate loci, candidate chromosomal regions, and random loci was undertaken. The ty-pos OCA locus was found to be linked to two arbitrary loci, D15S10 and D15S13, in the Prader-Willi/Angelman chromosomal region on chromosome 15q11.2-q12. The pink-eyed dilute locus, p, on mouse chromosome 7, maps close to a region of homology on human chromosome 15q, and we postulate that the ty-pos OCA and p loci are homologous.
1550114	Early British discoveries in human genetics: contributions of R.A. Fisher and J.B.S. Haldane to the development of blood groups.
17999359	RAD51 135G-->C modifies breast cancer risk among BRCA2 mutation carriers: results from a combined analysis of 19 studies. RAD51 is an important component of double-stranded DNA-repair mechanisms that interacts with both BRCA1 and BRCA2. A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of RAD51, 135G-->C, has been suggested as a possible modifier of breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. We pooled genotype data for 8,512 female mutation carriers from 19 studies for the RAD51 135G-->C SNP. We found evidence of an increased breast cancer risk in CC homozygotes (hazard ratio [HR] 1.92 [95% confidence interval {CI} 1.25-2.94) but not in heterozygotes (HR 0.95 [95% CI 0.83-1.07]; P=.002, by heterogeneity test with 2 degrees of freedom [df]). When BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers were analyzed separately, the increased risk was statistically significant only among BRCA2 mutation carriers, in whom we observed HRs of 1.17 (95% CI 0.91-1.51) among heterozygotes and 3.18 (95% CI 1.39-7.27) among rare homozygotes (P=.0007, by heterogeneity test with 2 df). In addition, we determined that the 135G-->C variant affects RAD51 splicing within the 5' UTR. Thus, 135G-->C may modify the risk of breast cancer in BRCA2 mutation carriers by altering the expression of RAD51. RAD51 is the first gene to be reliably identified as a modifier of risk among BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.
17847000	Cowden syndrome-affected patients with PTEN promoter mutations demonstrate abnormal protein translation. Germline mutations of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) are associated with the multihamartomatous disorder Cowden syndrome (CS). Moreover, patients with CS with germline PTEN promoter mutations have aberrant PTEN protein expression and an increased frequency of breast cancer. Here, we examined the downstream effect of five PTEN promoter variants (-861G/T, -853C/G, -834C/T, -798G/C, and -764G/A) that are not within any known cis-acting regulatory elements. Clinically, all five of these patients have been given diagnoses of breast, thyroid, and/or endometrial cancer. We demonstrated that protein binding to the PTEN promoter (-893 to -755) was not altered in the five variants when compared with the wild-type (WT) promoter. However, reporter assays indicated that three of the variants (-861G/T, -853C/G, and -764G/A) demonstrated an ~50% decrease in luciferase activity compared with the WT construct. PTEN messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were not altered in these variants, whereas secondary structure predictions indicated that different PTEN 5' untranslated region transcript-folding patterns exist in three variants, suggesting an inhibition of protein translation. This was confirmed by PTEN protein analysis. These data indicate that variants causing large mRNA secondary structure alterations result in an inhibition of protein translation and a decrease in PTEN protein expression. These data emphasize the importance of PTEN promoter nucleotide variations and their ability to lead to CS progression by a novel regulatory mechanism. Importantly, these patients have a high prevalence of breast, thyroid, and endometrial malignancies; thus, understanding of the mechanism of PTEN dysfunction in these patients will lead to more-sensitive molecular diagnostic and predictive testing and, ultimately, to rational targeted therapies to treat or prevent malignancy.
17503325	Red-green color vision impairment in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The present study evaluated the color vision of 44 patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) (mean age 14.8 years; SD 4.9) who were submitted to a battery of four different color tests: Cambridge Colour Test (CCT), Neitz Anomaloscope, Ishihara, and American Optical Hardy-Rand-Rittler (AO H-R-R). Patients were divided into two groups according to the region of deletion in the dystrophin gene: upstream of exon 30 (n=12) and downstream of exon 30 (n=32). The control group was composed of 70 age-matched healthy male subjects with no ophthalmological complaints. Of the patients with DMD, 47% (21/44) had a red-green color vision defect in the CCT, confirmed by the Neitz Anomaloscope with statistical agreement (P<.001). The Ishihara and the AO H-R-R had a lower capacity to detect color defects--5% and 7%, respectively, with no statistical similarity between the results of these two tests nor between CCT and Anomaloscope results (P>.05). Of the patients with deletion downstream of exon 30, 66% had a red-green color defect. No color defect was found in the patients with deletion upstream of exon 30. A negative correlation between the color thresholds and age was found for the controls and patients with DMD, suggesting a nonprogressive color defect. The percentage (66%) of patients with a red-green defect was significantly higher than the expected <10% for the normal male population (P<.001). In contrast, patients with DMD with deletion upstream of exon 30 had normal color vision. This color defect might be partially explained by a retina impairment related to dystrophin isoform Dp260.
17436244	Hypomorphic mutations in the gene encoding a key Fanconi anemia protein, FANCD2, sustain a significant group of FA-D2 patients with severe phenotype. FANCD2 is an evolutionarily conserved Fanconi anemia (FA) gene that plays a key role in DNA double-strand-type damage responses. Using complementation assays and immunoblotting, a consortium of American and European groups assigned 29 patients with FA from 23 families and 4 additional unrelated patients to complementation group FA-D2. This amounts to 3%-6% of FA-affected patients registered in various data sets. Malformations are frequent in FA-D2 patients, and hematological manifestations appear earlier and progress more rapidly when compared with all other patients combined (FA-non-D2) in the International Fanconi Anemia Registry. FANCD2 is flanked by two pseudogenes. Mutation analysis revealed the expected total of 66 mutated alleles, 34 of which result in aberrant splicing patterns. Many mutations are recurrent and have ethnic associations and shared allelic haplotypes. There were no biallelic null mutations; residual FANCD2 protein of both isotypes was observed in all available patient cell lines. These analyses suggest that, unlike the knockout mouse model, total absence of FANCD2 does not exist in FA-D2 patients, because of constraints on viable combinations of FANCD2 mutations. Although hypomorphic mutations arie involved, clinically, these patients have a relatively severe form of FA.
17503322	A genomewide admixture map for Latino populations. Admixture mapping is an economical and powerful approach for localizing disease genes in populations of recently mixed ancestry and has proven successful in African Americans. The method holds equal promise for Latinos, who typically inherit a mix of European, Native American, and African ancestry. However, admixture mapping in Latinos has not been practical because of the lack of a map of ancestry-informative markers validated in Native American and other populations. To address this, we screened multiple databases, containing millions of markers, to identify 4,186 markers that were putatively informative for determining the ancestry of chromosomal segments in Latino populations. We experimentally validated each of these markers in at least 232 new Latino, European, Native American, and African samples, and we selected a subset of 1,649 markers to form an admixture map. An advantage of our strategy is that we focused our map on markers distinguishing Native American from other ancestries and restricted it to markers with very similar frequencies in Europeans and Africans, which decreased the number of markers needed and minimized the possibility of false disease associations. We evaluated the effectiveness of our map for localizing disease genes in four Latino populations from both North and South America.
17847001	Copy-number variations measured by single-nucleotide-polymorphism oligonucleotide arrays in patients with mental retardation. Whole-genome analysis using high-density single-nucleotide-polymorphism oligonucleotide arrays allows identification of microdeletions, microduplications, and uniparental disomies. We studied 67 children with unexplained mental retardation with normal karyotypes, as assessed by G-banded chromosome analyses. Their DNAs were analyzed with Affymetrix 100K arrays. We detected 11 copy-number variations that most likely are causative of mental retardation, because they either arose de novo (9 cases) and/or overlapped with known microdeletions (2 cases). The eight deletions and three duplications varied in size from 200 kb to 7.5 Mb. Of the 11 copy-number variations, 5 were flanked by low-copy repeats. Two of those, on chromosomes 15q25.2 and Xp22.31, have not been described before and have a high probability of being causative of new deletion and duplication syndromes, respectively. In one patient, we found a deletion affecting only a single gene, MBD5, which codes for the methyl-CpG-binding domain protein 5. In addition to the 67 children, we investigated 4 mentally retarded children with apparent balanced translocations and detected four deletions at breakpoint regions ranging in size from 1.1 to 14 Mb.
17436254	Mutations in TCF4, encoding a class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, are responsible for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, a severe epileptic encephalopathy associated with autonomic dysfunction. Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a rare syndromic encephalopathy characterized by daily bouts of hyperventilation and a facial gestalt. We report a 1.8-Mb de novo microdeletion on chromosome 18q21.1, identified by array-comparative genomic hybridization in one patient with PHS. We subsequently identified two de novo heterozygous missense mutations of a conserved amino acid in the basic region of the TCF4 gene in three additional subjects with PHS. These findings demonstrate that TCF4 anomalies are responsible for PHS and provide the first evidence of a human disorder related to class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription-factor defects (also known as "E proteins"). Moreover, our data may shed new light on the normal processes underlying autonomic nervous system development and maintenance of an appropriate ventilatory neuronal circuitry.
17999356	Genetic basis for correction of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency by bezafibrate in patient fibroblasts: toward a genotype-based therapy. Very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is an inborn mitochondrial fatty-acid beta-oxidation (FAO) defect associated with a broad mutational spectrum, with phenotypes ranging from fatal cardiopathy in infancy to adolescent-onset myopathy, and for which there is no established treatment. Recent data suggest that bezafibrate could improve the FAO capacities in beta-oxidation-deficient cells, by enhancing the residual level of mutant enzyme activity via gene-expression stimulation. Since VLCAD-deficient patients frequently harbor missense mutations with unpredictable effects on enzyme activity, we investigated the response to bezafibrate as a function of genotype in 33 VLCAD-deficient fibroblasts representing 45 different mutations. Treatment with bezafibrate (400 microM for 48 h) resulted in a marked increase in FAO capacities, often leading to restoration of normal values, for 21 genotypes that mainly corresponded to patients with the myopathic phenotype. In contrast, bezafibrate induced no changes in FAO for 11 genotypes corresponding to severe neonatal or infantile phenotypes. This pattern of response was not due to differential inductions of VLCAD messenger RNA, as shown by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, but reflected variable increases in measured VLCAD residual enzyme activity in response to bezafibrate. Genotype cross-analysis allowed the identification of alleles carrying missense mutations, which could account for these different pharmacological profiles and, on this basis, led to the characterization of 9 mild and 11 severe missense mutations. Altogether, the responses to bezafibrate reflected the severity of the metabolic blockage in various genotypes, which appeared to be correlated with the phenotype, thus providing a new approach for analysis of genetic heterogeneity. Finally, this study emphasizes the potential of bezafibrate, a widely prescribed hypolipidemic drug, for the correction of VLCAD deficiency and exemplifies the integration of molecular information in a therapeutic strategy.
17503333	RAB23 mutations in Carpenter syndrome imply an unexpected role for hedgehog signaling in cranial-suture development and obesity. Carpenter syndrome is a pleiotropic disorder with autosomal recessive inheritance, the cardinal features of which include craniosynostosis, polysyndactyly, obesity, and cardiac defects. Using homozygosity mapping, we found linkage to chromosome 6p12.1-q12 and, in 15 independent families, identified five different mutations (four truncating and one missense) in RAB23, which encodes a member of the RAB guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) family of vesicle transport proteins and acts as a negative regulator of hedgehog (HH) signaling. In 10 patients, the disease was caused by homozygosity for the same nonsense mutation, L145X, that resides on a common haplotype, indicative of a founder effect in patients of northern European descent. Surprisingly, nonsense mutations of Rab23 in open brain mice cause recessive embryonic lethality with neural-tube defects, suggesting a species difference in the requirement for RAB23 during early development. The discovery of RAB23 mutations in patients with Carpenter syndrome implicates HH signaling in cranial-suture biogenesis--an unexpected finding, given that craniosynostosis is not usually associated with mutations of other HH-pathway components--and provides a new molecular target for studies of obesity.
17503332	Type 2 diabetes TCF7L2 risk genotypes alter birth weight: a study of 24,053 individuals. The role of genes in normal birth-weight variation is poorly understood, and it has been suggested that the genetic component of fetal growth is small. Type 2 diabetes genes may influence birth weight through maternal genotype, by increasing maternal glycemia in pregnancy, or through fetal genotype, by altering fetal insulin secretion. We aimed to assess the role of the recently described type 2 diabetes gene TCF7L2 in birth weight. We genotyped the polymorphism rs7903146 in 15,709 individuals whose birth weight was available from six studies and in 8,344 mothers from three studies. Each fetal copy of the predisposing allele was associated with an 18-g (95% confidence interval [CI] 7-29 g) increase in birth weight (P=.001) and each maternal copy with a 30-g (95% CI 15-45 g) increase in offspring birth weight (P=2.8x10-5). Stratification by fetal genotype suggested that the association was driven by maternal genotype (31-g [95% CI 9-48 g] increase per allele; corrected P=.003). Analysis of diabetes-related traits in 10,314 nondiabetic individuals suggested the most likely mechanism is that the risk allele reduces maternal insulin secretion (disposition index reduced by ~0.15 standard deviation; P=1x10-4), which results in increased maternal glycemia in pregnancy and hence increased offspring birth weight. We combined information with the other common variant known to alter fetal growth, the -30G-->A polymorphism of glucokinase (rs1799884). The 4% of offspring born to mothers carrying three or four risk alleles were 119 g (95% CI 62-172 g) heavier than were the 32% born to mothers with none (for overall trend, P=2x10-7), comparable to the impact of maternal smoking during pregnancy. In conclusion, we have identified the first type 2 diabetes-susceptibility allele to be reproducibly associated with birth weight. Common gene variants can substantially influence normal birth-weight variation.
17273962	Mitochondrial haplogroup N9a confers resistance against type 2 diabetes in Asians. Because mitochondria play pivotal roles in both insulin secretion from the pancreatic beta cells and insulin resistance of skeletal muscles, we performed a large-scale association study to identify mitochondrial haplogroups that may confer resistance against or susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The study population comprised 2,906 unrelated Japanese individuals, including 1,289 patients with T2DM and 1,617 controls, and 1,365 unrelated Korean individuals, including 732 patients with T2DM and 633 controls. The genotypes for 25 polymorphisms in the coding region of the mitochondrial genome were determined, and the haplotypes were classified into 10 major haplogroups (i.e., F, B, A, N9a, M7a, M7b, G, D4a, D4b, and D5). Multivariate logistic-regression analysis with adjustment for age and sex revealed that the mitochondrial haplogroup N9a was significantly associated with resistance against T2DM (P=.0002) with an odds ratio of 0.55 (95% confidence interval 0.40-0.75). Even in the modern environment, which is often characterized by satiety and physical inactivity, this haplogroup might confer resistance against T2DM.
17160901	An absence of cutaneous neurofibromas associated with a 3-bp inframe deletion in exon 17 of the NF1 gene (c.2970-2972 delAAT): evidence of a clinically significant NF1 genotype-phenotype correlation. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is characterized by cafe-au-lait spots, skinfold freckling, and cutaneous neurofibromas. No obvious relationships between small mutations (<20 bp) of the NF1 gene and a specific phenotype have previously been demonstrated, which suggests that interaction with either unlinked modifying genes and/or the normal NF1 allele may be involved in the development of the particular clinical features associated with NF1. We identified 21 unrelated probands with NF1 (14 familial and 7 sporadic cases) who were all found to have the same c.2970-2972 delAAT (p.990delM) mutation but no cutaneous neurofibromas or clinically obvious plexiform neurofibromas. Molecular analysis identified the same 3-bp inframe deletion (c.2970-2972 delAAT) in exon 17 of the NF1 gene in all affected subjects. The Delta AAT mutation is predicted to result in the loss of one of two adjacent methionines (codon 991 or 992) ( Delta Met991), in conjunction with silent ACA-->ACG change of codon 990. These two methionine residues are located in a highly conserved region of neurofibromin and are expected, therefore, to have a functional role in the protein. Our data represent results from the first study to correlate a specific small mutation of the NF1 gene to the expression of a particular clinical phenotype. The biological mechanism that relates this specific mutation to the suppression of cutaneous neurofibroma development is unknown.
17436249	Measuring European population stratification with microarray genotype data. A proper understanding of population genetic stratification--differences in individual ancestry within a population--is crucial in attempts to find genes for complex traits through association mapping. We report on genomewide typing of approximately 10,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 297 individuals, to explore population structure in Europeans of known and unknown ancestry. The results reveal the presence of several significant axes of stratification, most prominently in a northern-southeastern trend, but also along an east-west axis. We also demonstrate the selection and application of EuroAIMs (European ancestry informative markers) for ancestry estimation and correction. The Coriell Caucasian and CEPH (Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain) Utah sample panels, often used as proxies for European populations, are found to reflect different subsets of the continent's ancestry.
17160889	Identification of a novel BBS gene (BBS12) highlights the major role of a vertebrate-specific branch of chaperonin-related proteins in Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is primarily an autosomal recessive ciliopathy characterized by progressive retinal degeneration, obesity, cognitive impairment, polydactyly, and kidney anomalies. The disorder is genetically heterogeneous, with 11 BBS genes identified to date, which account for ~70% of affected families. We have combined single-nucleotide-polymorphism array homozygosity mapping with in silico analysis to identify a new BBS gene, BBS12. Patients from two Gypsy families were homozygous and haploidentical in a 6-Mb region of chromosome 4q27. FLJ35630 was selected as a candidate gene, because it was predicted to encode a protein with similarity to members of the type II chaperonin superfamily, which includes BBS6 and BBS10. We found pathogenic mutations in both Gypsy families, as well as in 14 other families of various ethnic backgrounds, indicating that BBS12 accounts for approximately 5% of all BBS cases. BBS12 is vertebrate specific and, together with BBS6 and BBS10, defines a novel branch of the type II chaperonin superfamily. These three genes are characterized by unusually rapid evolution and are likely to perform ciliary functions specific to vertebrates that are important in the pathophysiology of the syndrome, and together they account for about one-third of the total BBS mutational load. Consistent with this notion, suppression of each family member in zebrafish yielded gastrulation-movement defects characteristic of other BBS morphants, whereas simultaneous suppression of all three members resulted in severely affected embryos, possibly hinting at partial functional redundancy within this protein family.
17571465	Arthur G. Steinberg, 1912-2006.
17701907	Evidence of still-ongoing convergence evolution of the lactase persistence T-13910 alleles in humans. A single-nucleotide variant, C/T(-13910), located 14 kb upstream of the lactase gene (LCT), has been shown to be completely correlated with lactase persistence (LP) in northern Europeans. Here, we analyzed the background of the alleles carrying the critical variant in 1,611 DNA samples from 37 populations. Our data show that the T(-13910) variant is found on two different, highly divergent haplotype backgrounds in the global populations. The first is the most common LP haplotype (LP H98) present in all populations analyzed, whereas the others (LP H8-H12), which originate from the same ancestral allelic haplotype, are found in geographically restricted populations living west of the Urals and north of the Caucasus. The global distribution pattern of LP T(-13910) H98 supports the Caucasian origin of this allele. Age estimates based on different mathematical models show that the common LP T(-13910) H98 allele (approximately 5,000-12,000 years old) is relatively older than the other geographically restricted LP alleles (approximately 1,400-3,000 years old). Our data about global allelic haplotypes of the lactose-tolerance variant imply that the T(-13910) allele has been independently introduced more than once and that there is a still-ongoing process of convergent evolution of the LP alleles in humans.
17668385	Mutations in the BRWD3 gene cause X-linked mental retardation associated with macrocephaly. In the course of systematic screening of the X-chromosome coding sequences in 250 families with nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), two families were identified with truncating mutations in BRWD3, a gene encoding a bromodomain and WD-repeat domain-containing protein. In both families, the mutation segregates with the phenotype in affected males. Affected males have macrocephaly with a prominent forehead, large cupped ears, and mild-to-moderate intellectual disability. No truncating variants were found in 520 control X chromosomes. BRWD3 is therefore a new gene implicated in the etiology of XLMR associated with macrocephaly and may cause disease by altering intracellular signaling pathways affecting cellular proliferation.
17924341	Fine mapping versus replication in whole-genome association studies. Association replication studies have a poor track record and, even when successful, often claim association with different markers, alleles, and phenotypes than those reported in the primary study. It is unknown whether these outcomes reflect genuine associations or false-positive results. A greater understanding of these observations is essential for genomewide association (GWA) studies, since they have the potential to identify multiple new associations that that will require external validation. Theoretically, a repeat association with precisely the same variant in an independent sample is the gold standard for replication, but testing additional variants is commonplace in replication studies. Finding different associated SNPs within the same gene or region as that originally identified is often reported as confirmatory evidence. Here, we compare the probability of replicating a gene or region under two commonly used marker-selection strategies: an "exact" approach that involves only the originally significant markers and a "local" approach that involves both the originally significant markers and others in the same region. When a region of high intermarker linkage disequilibrium is tested to replicate an initial finding that is only weak association with disease, the local approach is a good strategy. Otherwise, the most powerful and efficient strategy for replication involves testing only the initially identified variants. Association with a marker other than that originally identified can occur frequently, even in the presence of real effects in a low-powered replication study, and instances of such association increase as the number of included variants increases. Our results provide a basis for the design and interpretation of GWA replication studies and point to the importance of a clear distinction between fine mapping and replication after GWA.
17236129	Complex inheritance pattern resembling autosomal recessive inheritance involving a microdeletion in thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome. Thrombocytopenia-absent radius (TAR) syndrome is characterized by hypomegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia and bilateral radial aplasia in the presence of both thumbs. Other frequent associations are congenital heart disease and a high incidence of cow's milk intolerance. Evidence for autosomal recessive inheritance comes from families with several affected individuals born to unaffected parents, but several other observations argue for a more complex pattern of inheritance. In this study, we describe a common interstitial microdeletion of 200 kb on chromosome 1q21.1 in all 30 investigated patients with TAR syndrome, detected by microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization. Analysis of the parents revealed that this deletion occurred de novo in 25% of affected individuals. Intriguingly, inheritance of the deletion along the maternal line as well as the paternal line was observed. The absence of this deletion in a cohort of control individuals argues for a specific role played by the microdeletion in the pathogenesis of TAR syndrome. We hypothesize that TAR syndrome is associated with a deletion on chromosome 1q21.1 but that the phenotype develops only in the presence of an additional as-yet-unknown modifier (mTAR).
17357082	Identification of a novel risk locus for progressive supranuclear palsy by a pooled genomewide scan of 500,288 single-nucleotide polymorphisms. To date, only the H1 MAPT haplotype has been consistently associated with risk of developing the neurodegenerative disease progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). We hypothesized that additional genetic loci may be involved in conferring risk of PSP that could be identified through a pooling-based genomewide association study of >500,000 SNPs. Candidate SNPs with large differences in allelic frequency were identified by ranking all SNPs by their probe-intensity difference between cohorts. The MAPT H1 haplotype was strongly detected by this methodology, as was a second major locus on chromosome 11p12-p11 that showed evidence of association at allelic (P<.001), genotypic (P<.001), and haplotypic (P<.001) levels and was narrowed to a single haplotype block containing the DNA damage-binding protein 2 (DDB2) and lysosomal acid phosphatase 2 (ACP2) genes. Since DNA damage and lysosomal dysfunction have been implicated in aging and neurodegenerative processes, both genes are viable candidates for conferring risk of disease.
12717633	A whole-genome screen of a quantitative trait of age-related maculopathy in sibships from the Beaver Dam Eye Study. Age-related maculopathy (ARM) is a leading cause of visual impairment among the elderly in Western populations. To identify ARM-susceptibility loci, we genotyped a subset of subjects from the Beaver Dam (WI) Eye Study and performed a model-free genomewide linkage analysis for markers linked to a quantitative measure of ARM. We initially genotyped 345 autosomal markers in 325 individuals (N=263 sib pairs) from 102 pedigrees. Ten regions suggestive of linkage with ARM were observed on chromosomes 3, 5, 6, 12, 15, and 16. Prior to fine mapping, the most significant regions were an 18-cM region on chromosome 12, near D12S1300 (P=.0159); a region on chromosome 3, near D3S1763, with a P value of.0062; and a 6-cM region on chromosome 16, near D16S769, with a P value of.0086. After expanding our analysis to include 25 additional fine-mapping markers, we found that a 14-cM region on chromosome 12, near D12S346 (located at 106.89 cM), showed the strongest indication of linkage, with a P value of.004. Three other regions, on chromosomes 5, 6, and 15, that were nominally significant at P< or =.01 are also appropriate for fine mapping.
12618959	Autosomal recessive HEM/Greenberg skeletal dysplasia is caused by 3 beta-hydroxysterol delta 14-reductase deficiency due to mutations in the lamin B receptor gene. Hydrops-ectopic calcification-"moth-eaten" (HEM) or Greenberg skeletal dysplasia is an autosomal recessive chondrodystrophy with a lethal course, characterized by fetal hydrops, short limbs, and abnormal chondro-osseous calcification. We found elevated levels of cholesta-8,14-dien-3beta-ol in cultured skin fibroblasts of an 18-wk-old fetus with HEM, compatible with a deficiency of the cholesterol biosynthetic enzyme 3beta-hydroxysterol delta(14)-reductase. Sequence analysis of two candidate genes encoding putative human sterol delta(14)-reductases (TM7SF2 and LBR) identified a homozygous 1599-1605TCTTCTA-->CTAGAAG substitution in exon 13 of the LBR gene encoding the lamin B receptor, which results in a truncated protein. Functional complementation of the HEM cells by transfection with control LBR cDNA confirmed that LBR encoded the defective sterol delta(14)-reductase. Mutations in LBR recently have been reported also to cause Pelger-Hut anomaly, an autosomal dominant trait characterized by hypolobulated nuclei and abnormal chromatin structure in granulocytes. The fact that the healthy mother of the fetus showed hypolobulated nuclei in 60% of her granulocytes confirms that classic Pelger-Hut anomaly represents the heterozygous state of 3beta-hydroxysterol delta(14)-reductase deficiency.
12900794	A full-likelihood method for the evaluation of causality of sequence variants from family data. In many disease genes, a substantial fraction of all rare variants detected cannot yet be used for genetic counselling because of uncertainty about their association with disease. One approach to the characterization of these unclassified variants is the analysis of patterns of cosegregation with disease in affected carrier families. Petersen et al. previously provided a simplistic Bayesian method for evaluation of causality of such sequence variants. In the present report, we propose a more general method based on the full pedigree likelihood, and we show that the use of this method can provide more accurate and informative assessment of causality than could the previous method. We further show that it is important that the pedigree information be as complete as possible and that the distinction be made between unaffected individuals and those of unknown phenotype.
12687497	A family-based test for correlation between gene expression and trait values. Advances in microarray technology have made it attractive to combine information on clinical traits, marker genotypes, and comprehensive gene expression from family studies to dissect complex disease genetics. Without accounting for family structure, methods that test for association between a trait and gene-expression levels can be misleading. We demonstrate that the standard unstratified test based on Pearson's correlation coefficient can produce spurious results when applied to family data, and we present a stratified family expression association test (FEXAT). We illustrate the utility of the FEXAT via simulation and an application to gene-expression data from lymphoblastoid cell lines from four CEPH families. The FEXAT has a smaller estimated false-discovery rate than the standard test when within-family correlations are of interest, and it detects biologically plausible correlations between beta catenin and genes in the WNT-activation pathway in humans that the standard test does not.
12474146	A susceptibility gene for psoriatic arthritis maps to chromosome 16q: evidence for imprinting. Several genetic loci have been reported for psoriasis, but none has been specifically linked to psoriatic arthritis (PsA), a condition that affects >10% of patients with psoriasis. A genetic component for PsA is suggested by segregation within families and high concordance among identical twins. We performed a linkage scan to map genes contributing to PsA. We identified 178 patients with PsA out of 906 patients who were included in our genetic study of psoriasis. Using a comprehensive genealogy database, we were able to connect 100 of these into 39 families. We genotyped the patients using a framework marker set of 1,000 microsatellite markers, with an average density of 3 cM, and performed multipoint, affected-only, allele-sharing linkage analysis using the Allegro program. On the basis of the initial results, we genotyped more markers for the most prominent loci. A linkage with a LOD score of 2.17 was observed on chromosome 16q. The linkage analysis, conditioned on paternal transmission to affected individuals, gave a LOD score of 4.19, whereas a LOD score of only 1.03 was observed when conditioned for maternal transmission. A suggestive locus on chromosome 16q has previously been implicated in psoriasis. Our data indicate that a gene at this locus may be involved in paternal transmission of PsA.
13680528	A genomewide screen of 345 families for autism-susceptibility loci. We previously reported a genomewide scan to identify autism-susceptibility loci in 110 multiplex families, showing suggestive evidence (P <.01) for linkage to autism-spectrum disorders (ASD) on chromosomes 5, 8, 16, 19, and X and showing nominal evidence (P <.05) on several additional chromosomes (2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 15, 18, and 20). In this follow-up analysis we have increased the sample size threefold, while holding the study design constant, so that we now report 345 multiplex families, each with at least two siblings affected with autism or ASD phenotype. Along with 235 new multiplex families, 73 new microsatellite markers were also added in 10 regions, thereby increasing the marker density at these strategic locations from 10 cM to approximately 2 cM and bringing the total number of markers to 408 over the entire genome. Multipoint maximum LOD scores (MLS) obtained from affected-sib-pair analysis of all 345 families yielded suggestive evidence for linkage on chromosomes 17, 5, 11, 4, and 8 (listed in order by MLS) (P <.01). The most significant findings were an MLS of 2.83 (P =.00029) on chromosome 17q, near the serotonin transporter (5-hydroxytryptamine transporter [5-HTT]), and an MLS of 2.54 (P =.00059) on 5p. The present follow-up genome scan, which used a consistent research design across studies and examined the largest ASD sample collection reported to date, gave either equivalent or marginally increased evidence for linkage at several chromosomal regions implicated in our previous scan but eliminated evidence for linkage at other regions.
12506336	CD36 polymorphism is associated with protection from cerebral malaria. The human protein CD36 is a major receptor for Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes and contributes to the pathology of P. falciparum malaria. We performed variation screening of the CD36 gene and examined the possible association between CD36 polymorphisms and the severity of malaria in 475 adult Thai patients with P. falciparum malaria. Accordingly, we identified nine CD36 polymorphisms with a high-frequency (>15%) minor allele. Of these, the frequencies of the -14T-->C allele in the upstream promoter region and the -53G-->T allele in the downstream promoter region were significantly decreased in patients with cerebral malaria compared to those with mild malaria (P=.016 for -14T-->C and P=.050 for -53G-->T). The analysis of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between the nine common polymorphisms revealed that there are two blocks with strong LD in the CD36 gene and that the -14T-->C and -53G-->T polymorphisms are within the upstream block of 35 kb from the upstream promoter to exon 8. Further association testing after the second variation screening in the upstream block indicated that the in3(TG)(12) (i.e., 12 TG repeats in intron 3) allele is most strongly associated with the reduction in the risk of cerebral malaria (odds ratio 0.59; 95% confidence interval 0.40-0.87; P=.0069). We found, by reverse-transcriptase PCR amplification, that in3(TG)(12) is involved in the nonproduction of the variant CD36 transcript that lacks exons 4 and 5. Since exon 5 of the gene is known to encode the ligand-binding domain for P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes, in3(TG)(12) itself or a primary variant on the haplotype with in3(TG)(12) may be responsible for protection from cerebral malaria in Thailand. Results of the present study suggest that LD mapping has potential for detecting a disease-associated variant on the basis of haplotype blocks.
12796855	Selection of genetic markers for association analyses, using linkage disequilibrium and haplotypes. The genotyping of closely spaced single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers frequently yields highly correlated data, owing to extensive linkage disequilibrium (LD) between markers. The extent of LD varies widely across the genome and drives the number of frequent haplotypes observed in small regions. Several studies have illustrated the possibility that LD or haplotype data could be used to select a subset of SNPs that optimize the information retained in a genomic region while reducing the genotyping effort and simplifying the analysis. We propose a method based on the spectral decomposition of the matrices of pairwise LD between markers, and we select markers on the basis of their contributions to the total genetic variation. We also modify Clayton's "haplotype tagging SNP" selection method, which utilizes haplotype information. For both methods, we propose sliding window-based algorithms that allow the methods to be applied to large chromosomal regions. Our procedures require genotype information about a small number of individuals for an initial set of SNPs and selection of an optimum subset of SNPs that could be efficiently genotyped on larger numbers of samples while retaining most of the genetic variation in samples. We identify suitable parameter combinations for the procedures, and we show that a sample size of 50-100 individuals achieves consistent results in studies of simulated data sets in linkage equilibrium and LD. When applied to experimental data sets, both procedures were similarly effective at reducing the genotyping requirement while maintaining the genetic information content throughout the regions. We also show that haplotype-association results that Hosking et al. obtained near CYP2D6 were almost identical before and after marker selection.
12740763	Identification of a novel gene and a common variant associated with uric acid nephrolithiasis in a Sardinian genetic isolate. Uric acid nephrolithiasis (UAN) is a common disease with an established genetic component that presents a complex mode of inheritance. While studying an ancient founder population in Talana, a village in Sardinia, we recently identified a susceptibility locus of approximately 2.5 cM for UAN on 10q21-q22 in a relatively small sample that was carefully selected through genealogical information. To refine the critical region and to identify the susceptibility gene, we extended our analysis to severely affected subjects from the same village. We confirm the involvement of this region in UAN through identical-by-descent sharing and autozygosity mapping, and we refine the critical region to an interval of approximately 67 kb associated with UAN by linkage-disequilibrium mapping. After inspecting the genomic sequences available in public databases, we determined that a novel gene overlaps this interval. This gene is divided into 15 exons, spanning a region of approximately 300 kb and generating at least four different proteins (407, 333, 462, and 216 amino acids). Interestingly, the last isoform was completely included in the 67-kb associated interval. Computer-assisted analysis of this isoform revealed at least one membrane-spanning domain and several N- and O-glycosylation consensus sites at N-termini, suggesting that it could be an integral membrane protein. Mutational analysis shows that a coding nucleotide variant (Ala62Thr), causing a missense in exon 12, is in strong association with UAN (P=.0051). Moreover, Ala62Thr modifies predicted protein secondary structure, suggesting that it may have a role in UAN etiology. The present study underscores the value of our small, genealogically well-characterized, isolated population as a model for the identification of susceptibility genes underlying complex diseases. Indeed, using a relatively small sample of affected and unaffected subjects, we identified a candidate gene for multifactorial UAN.
12687502	Preferential paternal origin of microdeletions caused by prezygotic chromosome or chromatid rearrangements in Sotos syndrome. Sotos syndrome (SoS) is characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth with advanced bone age; a dysmorphic face with macrocephaly and pointed chin; large hands and feet; mental retardation; and possible susceptibility to tumors. It has been shown that the major cause of SoS is haploinsufficiency of the NSD1 gene at 5q35, because the majority of patients had either a common microdeletion including NSD1 or a truncated type of point mutation in NSD1. In the present study, we traced the parental origin of the microdeletions in 26 patients with SoS by the use of 16 microsatellite markers at or flanking the commonly deleted region. Deletions in 18 of the 20 informative cases occurred in the paternally derived chromosome 5, whereas those in the maternally derived chromosome were found in only two cases. Haplotyping analysis of the marker loci revealed that the paternal deletion in five of seven informative cases and the maternal deletion in one case arose through an intrachromosomal rearrangement, and two other cases of the paternal deletion involved an interchromosomal event, suggesting that the common microdeletion observed in SoS did not occur through a uniform mechanism but preferentially arose prezygotically.
12587094	Use of multivariate linkage analysis for dissection of a complex cognitive trait. Replication of linkage results for complex traits has been exceedingly difficult, owing in part to the inability to measure the precise underlying phenotype, small sample sizes, genetic heterogeneity, and statistical methods employed in analysis. Often, in any particular study, multiple correlated traits have been collected, yet these have been analyzed independently or, at most, in bivariate analyses. Theoretical arguments suggest that full multivariate analysis of all available traits should offer more power to detect linkage; however, this has not yet been evaluated on a genomewide scale. Here, we conduct multivariate genomewide analyses of quantitative-trait loci that influence reading- and language-related measures in families affected with developmental dyslexia. The results of these analyses are substantially clearer than those of previous univariate analyses of the same data set, helping to resolve a number of key issues. These outcomes highlight the relevance of multivariate analysis for complex disorders for dissection of linkage results in correlated traits. The approach employed here may aid positional cloning of susceptibility genes in a wide spectrum of complex traits.
14610717	Allelic heterogeneity in LINE-1 retrotransposition activity. De novo LINE-1 (long interspersed element-1, or L1) retrotransposition events are responsible for approximately 1/1,000 disease-causing mutations in humans. Previously, L1.2 was identified as the likely progenitor of a mutagenic insertion in the factor VIII gene in a patient with hemophilia A. It subsequently was shown to be one of a small number of active L1s in the human genome. Here, we demonstrate that L1.2 is present at an intermediate insertion allele frequency in worldwide human populations and that common alleles (L1.2A and L1.2B) exhibit an approximately 16-fold difference in their ability to retrotranspose in cultured human HeLa cells. Chimera analysis revealed that two amino acid substitutions (S1259L and I1220M) downstream of the conserved cysteine-rich motif in L1 open reading frame 2 are largely responsible for the observed reduction in L1.2A retrotransposition efficiency. Thus, common L1 alleles can vary widely in their retrotransposition potential. We propose that such allelic heterogeneity can influence the potential L1 mutational load present in an individual genome.
12596792	Simulation-based P values: response to North et al.
12632327	Homozygous mutations in IHH cause acrocapitofemoral dysplasia, an autosomal recessive disorder with cone-shaped epiphyses in hands and hips. Acrocapitofemoral dysplasia is a recently delineated autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia, characterized clinically by short stature with short limbs and radiographically by cone-shaped epiphyses, mainly in hands and hips. Genomewide homozygosity mapping in two consanguineous families linked the locus to 2q35-q36 with a maximum two-point LOD score of 8.02 at marker D2S2248. Two recombination events defined the minimal critical region between markers D2S2248 and D2S2151 (3.74 cM). Using a candidate-gene approach, we identified two missense mutations in the amino-terminal signaling domain of the gene encoding Indian hedgehog (IHH). Both affected individuals of family 1 are homozygous for a 137C-->T transition (P46L), and the three patients in family 2 are homozygous for a 569T-->C transition (V190A). The two mutant amino acids are strongly conserved and predicted to be located outside the region where brachydactyly type A-1 mutations are clustered.
12557124	Human population genetic structure and inference of group membership. A major goal of biomedical research is to develop the capability to provide highly personalized health care. To do so, it is necessary to understand the distribution of interindividual genetic variation at loci underlying physical characteristics, disease susceptibility, and response to treatment. Variation at these loci commonly exhibits geographic structuring and may contribute to phenotypic differences between groups. Thus, in some situations, it may be important to consider these groups separately. Membership in these groups is commonly inferred by use of a proxy such as place-of-origin or ethnic affiliation. These inferences are frequently weakened, however, by use of surrogates, such as skin color, for these proxies, the distribution of which bears little resemblance to the distribution of neutral genetic variation. Consequently, it has become increasingly controversial whether proxies are sufficient and accurate representations of groups inferred from neutral genetic variation. This raises three questions: how many data are required to identify population structure at a meaningful level of resolution, to what level can population structure be resolved, and do some proxies represent population structure accurately? We assayed 100 Alu insertion polymorphisms in a heterogeneous collection of approximately 565 individuals, approximately 200 of whom were also typed for 60 microsatellites. Stripped of identifying information, correct assignment to the continent of origin (Africa, Asia, or Europe) with a mean accuracy of at least 90% required a minimum of 60 Alu markers or microsatellites and reached 99%-100% when >/=100 loci were used. Less accurate assignment (87%) to the appropriate genetic cluster was possible for a historically admixed sample from southern India. These results set a minimum for the number of markers that must be tested to make strong inferences about detecting population structure among Old World populations under ideal experimental conditions. We note that, whereas some proxies correspond crudely, if at all, to population structure, the heuristic value of others is much higher. This suggests that a more flexible framework is needed for making inferences about population structure and the utility of proxies.
12958705	Genomewide linkage and linkage disequilibrium analyses identify COL6A1, on chromosome 21, as the locus for ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) of the spine is a subset of "bone-forming" diseases, characterized by ectopic ossification in the spinal ligaments. OPLL is a common disorder among elderly populations in eastern Asia and is the leading cause of spinal myelopathy in Japan. We performed a genomewide linkage study with 142 affected sib pairs, to identify genetic loci related to OPLL. In multipoint linkage analysis using GENEHUNTER-PLUS, evidence of linkage to OPLL was detected on chromosomes 1p, 6p, 11q, 14q, 16q, and 21q. The best evidence of linkage was detected near D21S1903 on chromosome 21q22.3 (maximum Zlr=3.97); therefore, the linkage region was extensively investigated for linkage disequilibrium with single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering 20 Mb. One hundred fifty positional candidate genes lie in the region, and 600 gene-based SNPs were genotyped. There were positive allelic associations with seven genes (P<.01) in 280 patients and 210 controls, and four of the seven genes were clustered within a region of 750 kb, approximately 1.2 Mb telomeric to D21S1903. Extensive linkage disequilibrium and association studies of the four genes indicated that SNPs in the collagen 6A1 gene (COL6A1) were strongly associated with OPLL (P=.000003 for the SNP in intron 32 [-29]). Haplotype analysis with three SNPs in COL6A1 gave a single-point P value of.0000007. Identification of the locus of susceptibility to OPLL by genomewide linkage and linkage disequilibrium studies permits us to investigate the pathogenesis of the disease, which may lead to the development of novel therapeutic tools.
12474144	Support for association of schizophrenia with genetic variation in the 6p22.3 gene, dysbindin, in sib-pair families with linkage and in an additional sample of triad families. Genetic variants in a gene on 6p22.3, dysbindin, have been shown recently to be associated with schizophrenia (Straub et al. 2002a). There is no doubt that replication in other independent samples would enhance the significance of this finding considerably. Since the gene is located in the center of the linkage peak on chromosome 6p that we reported earlier, we decided to test six of the most positive DNA polymorphisms in a sib-pair sample and in an independently ascertained sample of triads comprising 203 families, including the families for which we detected linkage on chromosome 6p. Evidence for association was observed in the two samples separately as well as in the combined sample (P=.00068 for SNP rs760761). Multilocus haplotype analysis increased the significance further to .00002 for a two-locus haplotype and to .00001 for a three-locus haplotype. Estimation of frequencies for six-locus haplotypes revealed one common haplotype with a frequency of 73.4% in transmitted, and only 57.6% in nontransmitted, parental haplotypes. All other six-locus haplotypes occurring at a frequency of >1% were less often transmitted than nontransmitted. Our results represent a first successful replication of linkage disequilibrium in psychiatric genetics detected in a region with previous evidence of linkage and will encourage the search for causes of schizophrenia by the genetic approach.
14505274	An Alu transposition model for the origin and expansion of human segmental duplications. Relative to genomes of other sequenced organisms, the human genome appears particularly enriched for large, highly homologous segmental duplications (> or =90% sequence identity and > or =10 kbp in length). The molecular basis for this enrichment is unknown. We sought to gain insight into the mechanism of origin, by systematically examining sequence features at the junctions of duplications. We analyzed 9,464 junctions within regions of high-quality finished sequence from a genomewide set of 2,366 duplication alignments. We observed a highly significant (P<.0001) enrichment of Alu short interspersed element (SINE) sequences near or within the junction. Twenty-seven percent of all segmental duplications terminated within an Alu repeat. The Alu junction enrichment was most pronounced for interspersed segmental duplications separated by > or =1 Mb of intervening sequence. Alu elements at the junctions showed higher levels of divergence, consistent with Alu-Alu-mediated recombination events. When we classified Alu elements into major subfamilies, younger elements (AluY and AluS) accounted for the enrichment, whereas the oldest primate family (AluJ) showed no enrichment. We propose that the primate-specific burst of Alu retroposition activity (which occurred 35-40 million years ago) sensitized the ancestral human genome for Alu-Alu-mediated recombination events, which, in turn, initiated the expansion of gene-rich segmental duplications and their subsequent role in nonallelic homologous recombination.
12489041	Distribution patterns of postmortem damage in human mitochondrial DNA. The distribution of postmortem damage in mitochondrial DNA retrieved from 37 ancient human DNA samples was analyzed by cloning and was compared with a selection of published animal data. A relative rate of damage (rho(v)) was calculated for nucleotide positions within the human hypervariable region 1 (HVR1) and cytochrome oxidase subunit III genes. A comparison of damaged sites within and between the regions reveals that damage hotspots exist and that, in the HVR1, these correlate with sites known to have high in vivo mutation rates. Conversely, HVR1 subregions with known structural function, such as MT5, have lower in vivo mutation rates and lower postmortem-damage rates. The postmortem data also identify a possible functional subregion of the HVR1, termed "low-diversity 1," through the lack of sequence damage. The amount of postmortem damage observed in mitochondrial coding regions was significantly lower than in the HVR1, and, although hotspots were noted, these did not correlate with codon position. Finally, a simple method for the identification of incorrect archaeological haplogroup designations is introduced, on the basis of the observed spectrum of postmortem damage.
12970847	Recent advances in human quantitative-trait-locus mapping: comparison of methods for selected sibling pairs. During the past few years, there has been a great deal of new work on methods for mapping quantitative-trait loci by use of sibling pairs and sibships. There are several new methods based on linear regression, as well as several more that are based on score statistics. In theory, most of the new methods should be relatively robust to violations of distributional assumptions and to selected sampling, but, in practice, there has been little evaluation of how the methods perform on selected samples. We survey most of the new regression-based statistics and score statistics and propose a few minor variations on the score statistics. We use simulation to evaluate the type I error and the power of all of the statistics, considering (a) population samples of sibling pairs and (b) sibling pairs ascertained on the basis of at least one sibling with a trait value in the top 10% of the distribution. Most of the statistics have correct type I error for selected samples. The statistics proposed by Xu et al. and by Sham and Purcell are generally the most powerful, along with one of our score statistic variants. Even among the methods that are most powerful for "nice" data, some are more robust than others to non-Gaussian trait models and/or misspecified trait parameters.
10053017	Ancestral Asian source(s) of new world Y-chromosome founder haplotypes. Haplotypes constructed from Y-chromosome markers were used to trace the origins of Native Americans. Our sample consisted of 2,198 males from 60 global populations, including 19 Native American and 15 indigenous North Asian groups. A set of 12 biallelic polymorphisms gave rise to 14 unique Y-chromosome haplotypes that were unevenly distributed among the populations. Combining multiallelic variation at two Y-linked microsatellites (DYS19 and DXYS156Y) with the unique haplotypes results in a total of 95 combination haplotypes. Contra previous findings based on Y- chromosome data, our new results suggest the possibility of more than one Native American paternal founder haplotype. We postulate that, of the nine unique haplotypes found in Native Americans, haplotypes 1C and 1F are the best candidates for major New World founder haplotypes, whereas haplotypes 1B, 1I, and 1U may either be founder haplotypes and/or have arrived in the New World via recent admixture. Two of the other four haplotypes (YAP+ haplotypes 4 and 5) are probably present because of post-Columbian admixture, whereas haplotype 1G may have originated in the New World, and the Old World source of the final New World haplotype (1D) remains unresolved. The contrasting distribution patterns of the two major candidate founder haplotypes in Asia and the New World, as well as the results of a nested cladistic analysis, suggest the possibility of more than one paternal migration from the general region of Lake Baikal to the Americas.
10090909	A mutation (2314delG) in the Usher syndrome type IIA gene: high prevalence and phenotypic variation.
10577916	Variation in short tandem repeats is deeply structured by genetic background on the human Y chromosome. Eleven biallelic polymorphisms and seven short-tandem-repeat (STR) loci mapping on the nonrecombining portion of the human Y chromosome have been typed in men from northwestern Africa. Analysis of the biallelic markers, which represent probable unique events in human evolution, allowed us to characterize the stable backgrounds or haplogroups of Y chromosomes that prevail in this geographic region. Variation in the more rapidly mutating genetic markers (STRs) has been used both to estimate the time to the most recent common ancestor for STR variability within these stable backgrounds and to explore whether STR differentiation among haplogroups still retains information about their phylogeny. When analysis of molecular variance was used to study the apportionment of STR variation among both genetic backgrounds (i.e., those defined by haplogroups) and population backgrounds, we found STR variability to be clearly structured by haplogroups. More than 80% of the genetic variance was found among haplogroups, whereas only 3.72% of the genetic variation could be attributed to differences among populations-that is, genetic variability appears to be much more structured by lineage than by population. This was confirmed when two population samples from the Iberian Peninsula were added to the analysis. The deep structure of the genetic variation in old genealogical units (haplogroups) challenges a population-based perspective in the comprehension of human genome diversity. A population may be better understood as an association of lineages from a deep and population-independent gene genealogy, rather than as a complete evolutionary unit.
10521296	The origins of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-causing mutations in two South African subpopulations: a unique profile of both independent and founder events. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disease of the cardiac sarcomere, caused by numerous mutations in genes encoding protein components of this structure. Mutation carriers are at risk of sudden cardiac death, mostly as adolescents or young adults. The reproductive disadvantage incurred may explain both the global occurrence of diverse independent HCM-associated mutations and the rare reports of founder effects within populations. We have investigated whether this holds true for two South African subpopulations, one of mixed ancestry and one of northern-European descent. Previously, we had detected three novel mutations-Ala797Thr in the beta-myosin heavy-chain gene (betaMHC), Arg92Trp in the cardiac troponin T gene (cTnT), and Arg645His in the myosin-binding protein C gene (MyBPC)-and two documented betaMHC mutations (Arg403Trp and Arg249Gln). Here we report three additional novel mutations-Gln499Lys in betaMHC and Val896Met and Deltac756 in MyBPC-and the documented betaMHC Arg719Gln mutation. Seven of the nine HCM-causing mutations arose independently; no conclusions can be drawn for the remaining two. However, the betaMHC Arg403Trp and Ala797Thr and cTnT Arg92Trp mutations were detected in another one, eight, and four probands, respectively, and haplotype analysis in families carrying these recurring mutations inferred their origin from three common ancestors. The milder phenotype of the betaMHC mutations may account for the presence of these founder effects, whereas population dynamics alone may have overridden the reproductive disadvantage incurred by the more lethal, cTnT Arg92Trp mutation.
10486328	Assignment of the locus for hydrolethalus syndrome to a highly restricted region on 11q23-25. Hydrolethalus syndrome is a recessively inherited lethal malformation syndrome characterized by hydrocephaly with absent midline structures of the brain, micrognathia, polydactyly, and several other abnormalities, mostly in the midline structures. Hydrolethalus syndrome was described in 1981 in Finland, where the incidence is 1:20,000. Only a few cases have been reported elsewhere, and the pathogenesis has remained unknown. Here we report the assignment of the hydrolethalus syndrome locus to chromosome 11q23-25 in Finnish families. The initial genome scan was performed using DNA samples from only 15 affected individuals. In the next step, the hydrolethalus syndrome locus was assigned to an 8.5-cM interval between markers D11S4144 and D11S1351 by linkage analysis in eight families. Finally, the critical locus could be restricted by linkage disequilibrium and haplotype analyses to a 0.5-1-cM region between markers D11S933 and D11S934. Genealogical studies performed in 40 families affected by hydrolethalus revealed no regional clustering, suggesting a relatively early introduction of the disease mutation into the Finnish population and the spreading of the mutation with the inhabitation of the late-settlement area.
9973270	Protein fate in neurodegenerative proteinopathies: polyglutamine diseases join the (mis)fold.
10330344	Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis: novel mutations in the TRKA (NTRK1) gene encoding a high-affinity receptor for nerve growth factor. Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) is characterized by recurrent episodes of unexplained fever, anhidrosis (inability to sweat), absence of reaction to noxious stimuli, self-mutilating behavior, and mental retardation. Human TRKA encodes a high-affinity tyrosine kinase receptor for nerve growth factor (NGF), a member of the neurotrophin family that induces neurite outgrowth and promotes survival of embryonic sensory and sympathetic neurons. We have recently demonstrated that TRKA is responsible for CIPA by identifying three mutations in a region encoding the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain of TRKA in one Ecuadorian and three Japanese families. We have developed a comprehensive strategy to screen for TRKA mutations, on the basis of the gene's structure and organization. Here we report 11 novel mutations, in seven affected families. These are six missense mutations, two frameshift mutations, one nonsense mutation, and two splice-site mutations. Mendelian inheritance of the mutations is confirmed in six families for which parent samples are available. Two mutations are linked, on the same chromosome, to Arg85Ser and to His598Tyr;Gly607Val, hence, they probably represent double and triple mutations. The mutations are distributed in an extracellular domain, involved in NGF binding, as well as the intracellular signal-transduction domain. These data suggest that TRKA defects cause CIPA in various ethnic groups.
10441582	A second gene for autosomal dominant Mbius syndrome is localized to chromosome 10q, in a Dutch family. Mbius syndrome (MIM 157900) consists of a congenital paresis or paralysis of the VIIth (facial) cranial nerve, frequently accompanied by dysfunction of other cranial nerves. The abducens nerve is typically affected, and often, also, the hypoglossal nerve. In addition, orofacial and limb malformations, defects of the musculoskeletal system, and mental retardation are seen in patients with Mbius syndrome. Most cases are sporadic, but familial recurrence can occur. Different modes of inheritance are suggested by different pedigrees. Genetic heterogeneity of Mbius syndrome has been suggested by cytogenetic studies and linkage analysis. Previously, we identified a locus on chromosome 3q21-22, in a large Dutch family with Mbius syndrome consisting essentially of autosomal dominant asymmetric bilateral facial paresis. Here we report linkage analysis in a second large Dutch family with autosomal dominant inherited facial paresis. After exclusion of >90% of the genome, we identified the locus on the long arm of chromosome 10 in this family, demonstrating genetic heterogeneity of this condition. The reduced penetrance suggests that at least some of the sporadic cases might be familial.
10417286	Linkage analysis in a large Brazilian family with van der Woude syndrome suggests the existence of a susceptibility locus for cleft palate at 17p11.2-11.1. van der Woude syndrome (VWS), which has been mapped to 1q32-41, is characterized by pits and/or sinuses of the lower lip, cleft lip/palate (CL/P), cleft palate (CP), bifid uvula, and hypodontia (H). The expression of VWS, which has incomplete penetrance, is highly variable. Both the occurrence of CL/P and CP within the same genealogy and a recurrence risk <40% for CP among descendants with VWS have suggested that the development of clefts in this syndrome is influenced by modifying genes at other loci. To test this hypothesis, we have conducted linkage analysis in a large Brazilian kindred with VWS, considering as affected the individuals with CP, regardless of whether it is associated with other clinical signs of VWS. Our results suggest that a gene at 17p11.2-11.1, together with the VWS gene at 1p32-41, enhances the probability of CP in an individual carrying the two at-risk genes. If this hypothesis is confirmed in other VWS pedigrees, it will represent one of the first examples of a gene, mapped through linkage analysis, which modifies the expression of a major gene. It will also have important implications for genetic counseling, particularly for more accurately predicting recurrence risks of clefts among the offspring of patients with VWS.
9915936	1998 ASHG presidential address. Making genomic medicine a reality.
10205286	Genomewide Transmission/Disequilibrium testing: a correction.
9973271	Biological implications of the DNA structures associated with disease-causing triplet repeats.
9973288	Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome: the HRPT2 locus is within a 0.7-cM region on chromosome 1q. Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome (HPT-JT) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by the development of multiple parathyroid adenomas and multiple fibro-osseous tumors of the maxilla and mandible. Some families have had affected members with involvement of the kidneys, variously reported as Wilms tumors, nephroblastomas, and hamartomas. The HPT-JT gene (HRPT2) maps to chromosome 1q25-q31. We describe further investigation of two HPT-JT families (K3304 and K3349) identified through the literature. These two expanded families and two previously reported families were investigated jointly for linkage with 21 new, closely linked markers. Multipoint linkage analysis resulted in a maximum LOD score of 7.83 (at recombination fraction 0) for markers D1S2848-D1S191. Recombination events in these families reduced the HRPT2 region to approximately 14.7 cM. In addition, two of these four study families (i.e., K3304 and K11687) share a 2.2-cM length of their (expanded) affected haplotype, indicating a possible common origin. Combining the linkage data and shared-haplotype data, we propose a 0.7-cM candidate region for HRPT2.
10577941	Heterogenous point mutations in the mitochondrial tRNA Ser(UCN) precursor coexisting with the A1555G mutation in deaf students from Mongolia.
9915955	Localization of a gene for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis at chromosome 9q21.3-22 by homozygosity mapping. Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL), also known as familial erythrophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and familial histiocytic reticulosis, is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of early childhood characterized by excessive immune activation. Linkage of the disease gene to an approximately 7.8-cM region between markers D9S1867 and D9S1790 at 9q21.3-22 was identified by homozygosity mapping in four inbred FHL families of Pakistani descent with a combined maximum multipoint LOD score of 6.05. This is the first genetic locus to be described in FHL. However, homozygosity by descent across this interval could not be demonstrated in an additional affected kindred of Arab origin, whose maximum multipoint LOD score was -0.12. The combined sample revealed significant evidence for linkage to 9q markers (LOD score with heterogeneity, 5.00). Identification of the gene(s) involved in the pathogenesis of FHL will contribute to an understanding of the control of T-lymphocyte and macrophage activation, which is central to homeostasis in the immune system.
9915968	The Glu318Gly substitution in presenilin 1 is not causally related to Alzheimer disease.
10090915	Prevalence of Bloom syndrome heterozygotes among Ashkenazi Jews.
10521316	Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly: homozygosity mapping of MCPH4 to chromosome 15.
10521310	A complete genome screen in sib pairs affected by Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. The Tourette Syndrome Association International Consortium for Genetics. Gilles de la Tourette syndrome is a neuropsychiatric disorder characterized by waxing and waning multiple motor and phonic tics with a complex mode of inheritance. Previous attempts, which used large multigenerational families to localize susceptibility loci, have been unsuccessful. In this report, the results of the first systematic genome scan, using 76 affected-sib-pair families with a total of 110 sib pairs, are summarized. While no results reached acceptable statistical significance, the multipoint maximum-likelihood scores (MLS) for two regions (4q and 8p) were suggestive (MLS > 2.0). Four additional genomic regions also gave multipoint MLS scores between 1.0 and 2.0.
10486315	Tissue-specific somatic mosaicism in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy is dependent on CAG-repeat length and androgen receptor--gene expression level. The factors influencing the tissue-specific pattern of somatic mosaicism in CAG-repeat diseases have not yet been fully resolved. We performed a detailed analysis of the degree of somatic mosaicism in various tissues from 20 patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA), including 4 who were deceased. The most outstanding feature was the prominent somatic mosaicism observed in the cardiac and skeletal muscles, composed predominantly of postmitotic cells, and in the skin, prostate, and testis. The CNS tissues, liver, and spleen showed the least mosaicism. The tissue distribution of somatic mosaicism in patients with SBMA was markedly different from that in patients with Huntington disease (HD) and from that in patients with dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA). The degree of somatic mosaicism correlated with the CAG-repeat number but not with age at examination. Furthermore, tissues with a higher mosaicism level corresponded well to those with a higher expression level of androgen receptor protein. The tissue-specific pattern of somatic mosaicism related not only to cell composition with different cell turnover rates but to repeat size and gene expression levels, and postnatal cell division is unlikely to be a major cause of somatic mosaicism probably because of the relative stability of CAG repeat in SBMA.
20529654	ASHG Awards and Addresses. 2009 William Allan Award address: Life in the sandbox: unfinished business.
20471002	Pooled association tests for rare variants in exon-resequencing studies. Deep sequencing will soon generate comprehensive sequence information in large disease samples. Although the power to detect association with an individual rare variant is limited, pooling variants by gene or pathway into a composite test provides an alternative strategy for identifying susceptibility genes. We describe a statistical method for detecting association of multiple rare variants in protein-coding genes with a quantitative or dichotomous trait. The approach is based on the regression of phenotypic values on individuals' genotype scores subject to a variable allele-frequency threshold, incorporating computational predictions of the functional effects of missense variants. Statistical significance is assessed by permutation testing with variable thresholds. We used a rigorous population-genetics simulation framework to evaluate the power of the method, and we applied the method to empirical sequencing data from three disease studies.
20598277	Terminal osseous dysplasia is caused by a single recurrent mutation in the FLNA gene. Terminal osseous dysplasia (TOD) is an X-linked dominant male-lethal disease characterized by skeletal dysplasia of the limbs, pigmentary defects of the skin, and recurrent digital fibroma with onset in female infancy. After performing X-exome capture and sequencing, we identified a mutation at the last nucleotide of exon 31 of the FLNA gene as the most likely cause of the disease. The variant c.5217G>A was found in six unrelated cases (three families and three sporadic cases) and was not found in 400 control X chromosomes, pilot data from the 1000 Genomes Project, or the FLNA gene variant database. In the families, the variant segregated with the disease, and it was transmitted four times from a mildly affected mother to a more seriously affected daughter. We show that, because of nonrandom X chromosome inactivation, the mutant allele was not expressed in patient fibroblasts. RNA expression of the mutant allele was detected only in cultured fibroma cells obtained from 15-year-old surgically removed material. The variant activates a cryptic splice site, removing the last 48 nucleotides from exon 31. At the protein level, this results in a loss of 16 amino acids (p.Val1724_Thr1739del), predicted to remove a sequence at the surface of filamin repeat 15. Our data show that TOD is caused by this single recurrent mutation in the FLNA gene.
20137772	Autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets is associated with an inactivation mutation in the ENPP1 gene. Human disorders of phosphate (Pi) handling and hypophosphatemic rickets have been shown to result from mutations in PHEX, FGF23, and DMP1, presenting as X-linked recessive, autosomal-dominant, and autosomal-recessive patterns, respectively. We present the identification of an inactivating mutation in the ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) gene causing autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets (ARHR) with phosphaturia by positional cloning. ENPP1 generates inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), an essential physiologic inhibitor of calcification, and previously described inactivating mutations in this gene were shown to cause aberrant ectopic calcification disorders, whereas no aberrant calcifications were present in our patients. Our surprising result suggests a different pathway involved in the generation of ARHR and possible additional functions for ENPP1.
20537299	Principal-component analysis for assessment of population stratification in mitochondrial medical genetics. Although inherited mitochondrial genetic variation can cause human disease, no validated methods exist for control of confounding due to mitochondrial population stratification (PS). We sought to identify a reliable method for PS assessment in mitochondrial medical genetics. We analyzed mitochondrial SNP data from 1513 European American individuals concomitantly genotyped with the use of a previously validated panel of 144 mitochondrial markers as well as the Affymetrix 6.0 (n = 432), Illumina 610-Quad (n = 458), or Illumina 660 (n = 623) platforms. Additional analyses were performed in 938 participants in the Human Genome Diversity Panel (HGDP) (Illumina 650). We compared the following methods for controlling for PS: haplogroup-stratified analyses, mitochondrial principal-component analysis (PCA), and combined autosomal-mitochondrial PCA. We computed mitochondrial genomic inflation factors (mtGIFs) and test statistics for simulated case-control and continuous phenotypes (10,000 simulations each) with varying degrees of correlation with mitochondrial ancestry. Results were then compared across adjustment methods. We also calculated power for discovery of true associations under each method, using a simulation approach. Mitochondrial PCA recapitulated haplogroup information, but haplogroup-stratified analyses were inferior to mitochondrial PCA in controlling for PS. Correlation between nuclear and mitochondrial principal components (PCs) was very limited. Adjustment for nuclear PCs had no effect on mitochondrial analysis of simulated phenotypes. Mitochondrial PCA performed with the use of data from commercially available genome-wide arrays correlated strongly with PCA performed with the use of an exhaustive mitochondrial marker panel. Finally, we demonstrate, through simulation, no loss in power for detection of true associations with the use of mitochondrial PCA.
20579627	X-linked cone dystrophy caused by mutation of the red and green cone opsins. X-linked cone and cone-rod dystrophies (XLCOD and XLCORD) are a heterogeneous group of progressive disorders that solely or primarily affect cone photoreceptors. Mutations in exon ORF15 of the RPGR gene are the most common underlying cause. In a previous study, we excluded RPGR exon ORF15 in some families with XLCOD. Here, we report genetic mapping of XLCOD to Xq26.1-qter. A significant LOD score was detected with marker DXS8045 (Z(max) = 2.41 [theta = 0.0]). The disease locus encompasses the cone opsin gene array on Xq28. Analysis of the array revealed a missense mutation (c. 529T>C [p. W177R]) in exon 3 of both the long-wavelength-sensitive (LW, red) and medium-wavelength-sensitive (MW, green) cone opsin genes that segregated with disease. Both exon 3 sequences were identical and were derived from the MW gene as a result of gene conversion. The amino acid W177 is highly conserved in visual and nonvisual opsins across species. We show that W177R in MW opsin and the equivalent W161R mutation in rod opsin result in protein misfolding and retention in the endoplasmic reticulum. We also demonstrate that W177R misfolding, unlike the P23H mutation in rod opsin that causes retinitis pigmentosa, is not rescued by treatment with the pharmacological chaperone 9-cis-retinal. Mutations in the LW/MW cone opsin gene array can, therefore, lead to a spectrum of disease, ranging from color blindness to progressive cone dystrophy (XLCOD5).
20887961	Mutations in SCARF2 are responsible for Van Den Ende-Gupta syndrome. Van Den Ende-Gupta syndrome (VDEGS) is an extremely rare autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, which include blepharophimosis, malar and/or maxillary hypoplasia, a narrow and beaked nose, and an everted lower lip. Other features are arachnodactyly, camptodactyly, peculiar skeletal abnormalities, and normal development and intelligence. We present molecular data on four VDEGS patients from three consanguineous Qatari families belonging to the same highly inbred Bedouin tribe. The patients were genotyped with SNP microarrays, and a 2.4 Mb homozygous region was found on chromosome 22q11 in an area overlapping the DiGeorge critical region. This region contained 44 genes, including SCARF2, a gene that is expressed during development in a number of mouse tissues relevant to the symptoms described above. Sanger sequencing identified a missense change, c.773G>A (p.C258Y), in exon 4 in the two closely related patients and a 2 bp deletion in exon 8, c.1328_1329delTG (p.V443DfsX83), in two unrelated individuals. In parallel with the candidate gene approach, complete exome sequencing was used to confirm that SCARF2 was the gene responsible for VDEGS. SCARF2 contains putative epidermal growth factor-like domains in its extracellular domain, along with a number of positively charged residues in its intracellular domain, indicating that it may be involved in intracellular signaling. However, the function of SCARF2 has not been characterized, and this study reports that phenotypic effects can be associated with defects in the scavenger receptor F family of genes.
21035103	Fibrochondrogenesis results from mutations in the COL11A1 type XI collagen gene. Fibrochondrogenesis is a severe, autosomal-recessive, short-limbed skeletal dysplasia. In a single case of fibrochondrogenesis, whole-genome SNP genotyping identified unknown ancestral consanguinity by detecting three autozygous regions. Because of the predominantly skeletal nature of the phenotype, the 389 genes localized to the autozygous intervals were prioritized for mutation analysis by correlation of their expression with known cartilage-selective genes via the UCLA Gene Expression Tool, UGET. The gene encoding the 1 chain of type XI collagen (COL11A1) was the only cartilage-selective gene among the three candidate intervals. Sequence analysis of COL11A1 in two genetically independent fibrochondrogenesis cases demonstrated that each was a compound heterozygote for a loss-of-function mutation on one allele and a mutation predicting substitution for a conserved triple-helical glycine residue on the other. The parents who were carriers of missense mutations had myopia. Early-onset hearing loss was noted in both parents who carried a loss-of-function allele, suggesting COL11A1 as a locus for mild, dominantly inherited hearing loss. These findings identify COL11A1 as a locus for fibrochondrogenesis and indicate that there might be phenotypic manifestations among carriers.
20466092	The number of markers in the HapMap project: some notes on chi-square and exact tests for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
20602914	Whole exome sequencing and homozygosity mapping identify mutation in the cell polarity protein GPSM2 as the cause of nonsyndromic hearing loss DFNB82. Massively parallel sequencing of targeted regions, exomes, and complete genomes has begun to dramatically increase the pace of discovery of genes responsible for human disorders. Here we describe how exome sequencing in conjunction with homozygosity mapping led to rapid identification of the causative allele for nonsyndromic hearing loss DFNB82 in a consanguineous Palestinian family. After filtering out worldwide and population-specific polymorphisms from the whole exome sequence, only a single deleterious mutation remained in the homozygous region linked to DFNB82. The nonsense mutation leads to an early truncation of the G protein signaling modulator GPSM2, a protein that is essential for maintenance of cell polarity and spindle orientation. In the mouse inner ear, GPSM2 is localized to apical surfaces of hair cells and supporting cells and is most highly expressed during embryonic development. Identification of GPSM2 as essential to the development of normal hearing suggests dysregulation of cell polarity as a mechanism underlying hearing loss.
20826270	Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN14 is a regulator of lymphatic function and choanal development in humans. The lymphatic vasculature is essential for the recirculation of extracellular fluid, fat absorption, and immune function and as a route of tumor metastasis. The dissection of molecular mechanisms underlying lymphangiogenesis has been accelerated by the identification of tissue-specific lymphatic endothelial markers and the study of congenital lymphedema syndromes. We report the results of genetic analyses of a kindred inheriting a unique autosomal-recessive lymphedema-choanal atresia syndrome. These studies establish linkage of the trait to chromosome 1q32-q41 and identify a loss-of-function mutation in PTPN14, which encodes a nonreceptor tyrosine phosphatase. The causal role of PTPN14 deficiency was confirmed by the generation of a murine Ptpn14 gene trap model that manifested lymphatic hyperplasia with lymphedema. Biochemical studies revealed a potential interaction between PTPN14 and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3), a receptor tyrosine kinase essential for lymphangiogenesis. These results suggest a unique and conserved role for PTPN14 in the regulation of lymphatic development in mammals and a nonconserved role in choanal development in humans.
20817137	Exome sequencing identifies WDR35 variants involved in Sensenbrenner syndrome. Sensenbrenner syndrome/cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED) is an autosomal-recessive disease that is characterized by craniosynostosis and ectodermal and skeletal abnormalities. We sequenced the exomes of two unrelated CED patients and identified compound heterozygous mutations in WDR35 as the cause of the disease in each of the two patients independently, showing that it is possible to find the causative gene by sequencing the exome of a single sporadic patient. With RT-PCR, we demonstrate that a splice-site mutation in exon 2 of WDR35 alters splicing of RNA on the affected allele, introducing a premature stop codon. WDR35 is homologous to TULP4 (from the Tubby superfamily) and has previously been characterized as an intraflagellar transport component, confirming that Sensenbrenner syndrome is a ciliary disorder.
21129725	Replication strategies for rare variant complex trait association studies via next-generation sequencing. There is solid evidence that complex traits can be caused by rare variants. Next-generation sequencing technologies are powerful tools for mapping rare variants. Confirmation of significant findings in stage 1 through replication in an independent stage 2 sample is necessary for association studies. For gene-based mapping of rare variants, two replication strategies are possible: (1) variant-based replication, wherein only variants from nucleotide sites uncovered in stage 1 are genotyped and followed-up and (2) sequence-based replication, wherein the gene region is sequenced in the replication sample and both known and novel variants are tested. The efficiency of the two strategies is dependent on the proportions of causative variants discovered in stage 1 and sequencing/genotyping errors. With rigorous population genetic and phenotypic models, it is demonstrated that sequence-based replication is consistently more powerful. However, the power gain is small (1) for large-scale studies with thousands of individuals, because a large fraction of causative variant sites can be observed and (2) for small- to medium-scale studies with a few hundred samples, because a large proportion of the locus population attributable risk can be explained by the uncovered variants. Therefore, genotyping can be a temporal solution for replicating genetic studies if stage 1 and 2 samples are drawn from the same population. However, sequence-based replication is advantageous if the stage 1 sample is small or novel variants discovery is also of interest. It is shown that currently attainable levels of sequencing error only minimally affect the comparison, and the advantage of sequence-based replication remains.
20691405	Mutations in PVRL4, encoding cell adhesion molecule nectin-4, cause ectodermal dysplasia-syndactyly syndrome. Ectodermal dysplasias form a large disease family with more than 200 members. The combination of hair and tooth abnormalities, alopecia, and cutaneous syndactyly is characteristic of ectodermal dysplasia-syndactyly syndrome (EDSS). We used a homozygosity mapping approach to map the EDSS locus to 1q23 in a consanguineous Algerian family. By candidate gene analysis, we identified a homozygous mutation in the PVRL4 gene that not only evoked an amino acid change but also led to exon skipping. In an Italian family with two siblings affected by EDSS, we further detected a missense and a frameshift mutation. PVRL4 encodes for nectin-4, a cell adhesion molecule mainly implicated in the formation of cadherin-based adherens junctions. We demonstrated high nectin-4 expression in hair follicle structures, as well as in the separating digits of murine embryos, the tissues mainly affected by the EDSS phenotype. In patient keratinocytes, mutated nectin-4 lost its capability to bind nectin-1. Additionally, in discrete structures of the hair follicle, we found alterations of the membrane localization of nectin-afadin and cadherin-catenin complexes, which are essential for adherens junction formation, and we found reorganization of actin cytoskeleton. Together with cleft lip and/or palate ectodermal dysplasia (CLPED1, or Zlotogora-Ogur syndrome) due to an impaired function of nectin-1, EDSS is the second known "nectinopathy" caused by mutations in a nectin adhesion molecule.
20920665	Identification of copy number variation hotspots in human populations. Copy number variants (CNVs) in the human genome contribute to both Mendelian and complex traits as well as to genomic plasticity in evolution. The investigation of mutational rates of CNVs is critical to understanding genomic instability and the etiology of the copy number variation (CNV)-related traits. However, the evaluation of the CNV mutation rate at the genome level poses an insurmountable practical challenge that requires large samples and accurate typing. In this study, we show that an approximate estimation of the CNV mutation rate could be achieved by using the phylogeny information of flanking SNPs. This allows a genome-wide comparison of mutation rates between CNVs with the use of vast, readily available data of SNP genotyping. A total of 4187 CNV regions (CNVRs) previously identified in HapMap populations were investigated in this study. We showed that the mutation rates for the majority of these CNVRs are at the order of 10 per generation, consistent with experimental observations at individual loci. Notably, the mutation rates of 104 (2.5%) CNVRs were estimated at the order of 10 per generation; therefore, they were identified as potential hotspots. Additional analyses revealed that genome architecture at CNV loci has a potential role in inciting mutational hotspots in the human genome. Interestingly, 49 (47%) CNV hotspots include human genes, some of which are known to be functional CNV loci (e.g., CNVs of C4 and -defensin causing autoimmune diseases and CNVs of HYDIN with implication in control of cerebral cortex size), implicating the important role of CNV in human health and evolution, especially in common and complex diseases.
20226436	A follow-up study of a genome-wide association scan identifies a susceptibility locus for venous thrombosis on chromosome 6p24.1. To identify genetic susceptibility factors conferring increased risk of venous thrombosis (VT), we conducted a multistage study, following results of a previously published GWAS that failed to detect loci for developing VT. Using a collection of 5862 cases with VT and 7112 healthy controls, we identified the HIVEP1 locus on chromosome 6p24.1 as a susceptibility locus for VT. Indeed, the HIVEP1 rs169713C allele was associated with an increased risk for VT, with an odds ratio of 1.20 (95% confidence interval 1.13-1.27, p = 2.86 x 10(-9)). HIVEP1 codes for a protein that participates in the transcriptional regulation of inflammatory target genes by binding specific DNA sequences in their promoter and enhancer regions. The current results provide the identification of a locus involved in VT susceptibility that lies outside the traditional coagulation/fibrinolysis pathway.
20206336	Identification of a recurrent microdeletion at 17q23.1q23.2 flanked by segmental duplications associated with heart defects and limb abnormalities. Segmental duplications, which comprise approximately 5%-10% of the human genome, are known to mediate medically relevant deletions, duplications, and inversions through nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) and have been suggested to be hot spots in chromosome evolution and human genomic instability. We report seven individuals with microdeletions at 17q23.1q23.2, identified by microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). Six of the seven deletions are approximately 2.2 Mb in size and flanked by large segmental duplications of >98% sequence identity and in the same orientation. One of the deletions is approximately 2.8 Mb in size and is flanked on the distal side by a segmental duplication, whereas the proximal breakpoint falls between segmental duplications. These characteristics suggest that NAHR mediated six out of seven of these rearrangements. These individuals have common features, including mild to moderate developmental delay (particularly speech delay), microcephaly, postnatal growth retardation, heart defects, and hand, foot, and limb abnormalities. Although all individuals had at least mild dysmorphic facial features, there was no characteristic constellation of features that would elicit clinical suspicion of a specific disorder. The identification of common clinical features suggests that microdeletions at 17q23.1q23.2 constitute a novel syndrome. Furthermore, the inclusion in the minimal deletion region of TBX2 and TBX4, transcription factors belonging to a family of genes implicated in a variety of developmental pathways including those of heart and limb, suggests that these genes may play an important role in the phenotype of this emerging syndrome.
20537301	A definitive haplotype map as determined by genotyping duplicated haploid genomes finds a predominant haplotype preference at copy-number variation events. The majority of complete hydatidiform moles (CHMs) harbor duplicated haploid genomes that originate from sperm. This makes CHMs more advantageous than conventional diploid cells for determining haplotypes of SNPs and copy-number variations (CNVs), because all of the genetic variants in a CHM genome are homozygous. Here we report SNP and CNV haplotype structures determined by analysis of 100 CHMs from Japanese subjects via high-density DNA arrays. The obtained haplotype map should be useful as a reference for the haplotype structure of Asian populations. We resolved common CNV regions (merged CNV segments across the examined samples) into CNV events (clusters of CNV segments) on the basis of mutual overlap and found that the haplotype backgrounds of different CNV events within the same CNV region were predominantly similar, perhaps because of inherent structural instability.
20970104	Mutations in NEXN, a Z-disc gene, are associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), the most common inherited cardiac disorder, is characterized by increased ventricular wall thickness that cannot be explained by underlying conditions, cadiomyocyte hypertrophy and disarray, and increased myocardial fibrosis. In as many as 50% of HCM cases, the genetic cause remains unknown, suggesting that more genes may be involved. Nexilin, encoded by NEXN, is a cardiac Z-disc protein recently identified as a crucial protein that functions to protect cardiac Z-discs from forces generated within the sarcomere. We screened NEXN in 121 unrelated HCM patients who did not carry any mutation in eight genes commonly mutated in myofilament disease. Two missense mutations, c.391C>G (p.Q131E) and c.835C>T (p.R279C), were identified in exons 5 and 8 of NEXN, respectively, in two probands. Each of the two mutations segregated with the HCM phenotype in the family and was absent in 384 control chromosomes. In silico analysis revealed that both of the mutations affect highly conserved amino acid residues, which are predicted to be functionally deleterious. Cellular transfection studies showed that the two mutations resulted in local accumulations of nexilin and that the expressed fragment of actin-binding domain containing p.Q131E completely lost the ability to bind F-actin in C2C12 cells. Coimmunoprecipitation assay indicated that the p.Q131E mutation decreased the binding of full-length NEXN to -actin and abolished the interaction between the fragment of actin-binding domain and -actin. Therefore, the mutations in NEXN that we describe here may further expand the knowledge of Z-disc genes in the pathogenesis of HCM.
20021999	Loss-of-function mutations in the PRPS1 gene cause a type of nonsyndromic X-linked sensorineural deafness, DFN2. We report a large Chinese family with X-linked postlingual nonsyndromic hearing impairment in which the critical linkage interval spans a genetic distance of 5.41 cM and a physical distance of 15.1 Mb that overlaps the DFN2 locus. Mutation screening of the PRPS1 gene in this family and in the three previously reported DFN2 families identified four different missense mutations in PRPS1. These mutations result in a loss of phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) synthetase 1 activity, as was shown in silico by structural analysis and was shown in vitro by enzymatic activity assays in erythrocytes and fibroblasts from patients. By in situ hybridization, we demonstrate expression of Prps1 in murine vestibular and cochlea hair cells, with continuous expression in hair cells and postnatal expression in the spiral ganglion. Being the second identified gene associated with X-linked nonsyndromic deafness, PRPS1 will be a good candidate gene for genetic testing for X-linked nonsyndromic hearing loss.
7717407	Human T-cell receptor V beta gene polymorphism and multiple sclerosis. Population-based genetic associations have been reported between RFLPs detected with probes corresponding to the genes encoding the beta chain of the T-cell receptor for antigen (TCRB) and a variety of autoimmune disorders. In the case of multiple sclerosis (MS), these studies have localized a putative disease-associated gene to a region of approximately 110 kb in length, located within the TCRB locus. In the current study, all 14 known TCRBV (variable region) genes within the region of localization were mapped and identified. The nucleotide sequences of these genes were determined in a panel of six MS patients and six healthy controls, who were human-leukocyte antigen and TCRB-RFLP haplotype matched. Nine of the 14 TCRBV genes studied showed evidence of polymorphism. PCR-based assays for each of these polymorphic genes were developed, and allele and genotype frequencies were determined in a panel of DNA samples from 48 MS patients and 60 control individuals. No significant differences in allele, genotype, or phenotype frequencies were observed between the MS patients and controls for any of the 14 TCRBV-gene polymorphisms studied. In light of the extensive linkage disequilibrium across the region studied, the saturating numbers of polymorphisms examined, and the direct sequence analysis of all BV genes in the region, these results suggest that it is unlikely that germ-line polymorphism in the TCRBV locus makes a major contribution to MS susceptibility.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
7726158	Seven novel mutations in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene and genotype/phenotype correlations in severe methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency. 5-Methyltetrahydrofolate, the major form of folate in plasma, is a carbon donor for the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine. This form of folate is generated from 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate through the action of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), a cytosolic flavoprotein. Patients with an autosomal recessive severe deficiency of MTHFR have homocystinuria and a wide range of neurological and vascular disturbances. We have recently described the isolation of a cDNA for MTHFR and the identification of two mutations in patients with severe MTHFR deficiency. We report here the characterization of seven novel mutations in this gene: six missense mutations and a 5' splice-site defect that activates a cryptic splice site in the coding sequence. We also present a preliminary analysis of the relationship between genotype and phenotype for all nine mutations identified thus far in this gene. A nonsense mutation and two missense mutations (proline to leucine and threonine to methionine) in the homozygous state are associated with extremely low activity (0%-3%) and onset of symptoms within the 1st year of age. Other missense mutations (arginine to cysteine and arginine to glutamine) are associated with higher enzyme activity and later onset of symptoms.
7762555	The molecular basis of homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency in Italian families, and report of four novel mutations. Four new mutations in the cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) gene have been identified in Italian patients with homocystinuria. The first mutation is a G-to-A transition at base 374 in exon 3, causing an arginine-to-glutamic acid substitution at position 125 of the protein (R125Q). This mutation has been found in homozygosity in a patient partially responsive to pyridoxine treatment. The second mutation is a C-to-T transition at base 770 in exon 7, causing a threonine-to-methionine substitution at amino acid 257 of the protein (T257M). This mutation has been observed in homozygosity in a patient nonresponsive to the cofactor treatment. The third mutation, found in heterozygosity in a patient responsive to pyridoxine treatment, is an insertion of 68 bp in exon 8 at base 844, which introduces a premature termination codon. The fourth mutation is C-to-T transition in exon 2 at base 262, causing a proline-to-serine substitution at position 88 of the protein (P88S). This mutation is carried on a single allele in three affected sisters responsive to the cofactor treatment. In addition, six previously reported mutations (A114V, E131D, P145L, I278T, G307S, and A1224-2C) have been tested in 14 independent Italian families. Mutations A114V and I278T are carried by three and by seven independent alleles, respectively. The other four mutations--including G307S and A1224-2C, common among northern European patients--have not been detected.
7485151	Mutations in SOX9, the gene responsible for Campomelic dysplasia and autosomal sex reversal. Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is a skeletal malformation syndrome frequently accompanied by 46,XY sex reversal. A mutation-screening strategy using SSCP was employed to identify mutations in SOX9, the chromosome 17q24 gene responsible for CD and autosomal sex reversal in man. We have screened seven CD patients with no cytologically detectable chromosomal aberrations and two CD patients with chromosome 17 rearrangements for mutations in the entire open reading frame of SOX9. Five different mutations have been identified in six CD patients: two missense mutations in the SOX9 putative DNA binding domain (high mobility group, or HMG, box); three frameshift mutations and a splice-acceptor mutation. An identical frameshift mutation is found in two unrelated 46,XY patients, one exhibiting a male phenotype and the other displaying a female phenotype (XY sex reversal). All mutations found affect a single allele, which is consistent with a dominant mode of inheritance. No mutations were found in the SOX9 open reading frame of two patients with chromosome 17q rearrangements, suggesting that the translocations affect SOX9 expression. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that CD results from haploinsufficiency of SOX9.
7825583	Mapping of the gene for Machado-Joseph disease within a 3.6-cM interval flanked by D14S291/D14S280 and D14S81, on the basis of studies of linkage and linkage disequilibrium in 24 Japanese families. The gene locus of Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) has recently been mapped within a 29-cM subregion of 14q chromosome. We did a linkage study of 24 multigenerational MJD Japanese pedigrees, in an attempt to narrow the candidate region of this gene. Pairwise and multipoint linkage analysis, together with haplotype segregation analysis, led to the conclusion that the MJD gene is located at the 6.8-cM interval between D14S256 and D14S81 (Zmax = 24.78, multipoint linkage analysis). D14S291 and D14S280, located at the center of this interval, showed no obligate recombination with the MJD gene (Zmax = 5.93 for D14S291 and 9.99 for D14S280). A weak, but significant, linkage disequilibrium of MJD gene was noted with D14S81 (P < .05) but not with D14S291 or D14S280. These results suggest that a 3.6-cM interval flanked by D14S291/D14S280 and D14S81 is the most likely location of the MJD gene and that it is closest to D14S81.
7825598	Evidence for an association between RFLPs at the transforming growth factor alpha (locus) and nonsyndromic cleft lip/palate in a South American population.
7611281	Tyrosinase inhibition due to interaction of homocyst(e)ine with copper: the mechanism for reversible hypopigmentation in homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency. Deficiency of cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) is a genetic disorder of transsulfuration resulting in elevated plasma homocyst(e)ine and methionine and decreased cysteine. Affected patients have multisystem involvement, which may include light skin and hair. Reversible hypopigmentation in treated homocystinuric patients has been infrequently reported, and the mechanism is undefined. Two CBS-deficient homocystinuric patients manifested darkening of their hypopigmented hair following treatment that decreased plasma homocyst(e)ine. We hypothesized that homocyst(e)ine inhibits tyrosinase, the major pigment enzyme. The activity of tyrosinase extracted from pigmented human melanoma cells (MNT-1) that were grown in the presence of homocysteine was reduced in comparison to that extracted from cells grown without homocysteine. Copper sulfate restored homocyst(e)ine-inhibited tyrosinase activity when added to the culture cell media at a proportion of 1.25 mol of copper sulfate per 1 mol of DL-homocysteine. Holo-tyrosinase activity was inhibited by adding DL-homocysteine to the assay reaction mixture, and the addition of copper sulfate to the reaction mixture prevented this inhibition. Other tested compounds, L-cystine and betaine did not affect tyrosinase activity. Our data suggest that reversible hypopigmentation in homocystinuria is the result of tyrosinase inhibition by homocyst(e)ine and that the probable mechanism of this inhibition is the interaction of homocyst(e)ine with copper at the active site of tyrosinase.
8533774	Discordant patterns of linkage disequilibrium of the peptide-transporter loci within the HLA class II region. Disequilibrium between genetic markers is expected to decline monotonically with recombinational map distance. We present evidence from the HLA class II region that seems to violate this principle. Pairwise disequilibrium values were calculated from six loci ranging in physical separation from 15 kb to 550 kb. The histocompatibility loci DRB1, DQA1, and DQB1, located on the distal end of the class II region, behave as a single evolutionary unit within which extremely high linkage disequilibrium exists. Lower but still significant levels of disequilibrium are present between these loci and DPB1, located at the proximal edge of the HLA complex. The peptide-transporter loci TAP1 and TAP2, located in the intervening region, reveal no disequilibrium with each other and low or negligible disequilibrium with the flanking loci. The action of two genetic process is required to account for this phenomenon: a recombinational hotspot operating between TAP1 and TAP2, to eliminate disequilibrium between these loci, and at the same time selection operating on particular combinations of alleles across the DR-DP region, to create disequilibrium in the favored haplotypes. The forces producing the patterns of disequilibrium observed here have implications for the mapping of train loci and disease genes: markers of TAP1, for example, would give a false impression as to the influence of DPB1 on a trait known to be associated with DQB1.
7847368	Response to treatment in hereditary metabolic disease: 1993 survey and 10-year comparison. Knowledge about cause, pathogenesis, and manifestations of hereditary metabolic diseases puts them among the best known of all human diseases. On the other hand, outcomes of treatment are cause for uncertainty and concern. In 1985, Hayes et al. analyzed efficacy of treatment up to 1983 in 65 of these diseases selected randomly from the McKusick catalogs. Disease scores were calculated for seven parameters: longevity; reproductive capability; somatic and cognitive development; and handicaps affecting schooling, work, and cosmetic appearance. Scores of the untreated and treated phenotypes were then compared. We have now measured progress over the past decade by calculating scores on the same 65 diseases from data in several hundred new reports published since 1983. All seven parameters in the 1993 survey reflect improved efficacy of treatment in the 10-year interval. However, the percent of diseases for which all manifestations of the disease were removed by treatment has not changed (12% in 1983; 12% in 1993). The group in which manifestations were untouched by treatment has become smaller (48% in 1983; 31% in 1993), and the group partially ameliorated by treatment had increased reciprocally (40% in 1983; 57% in 1993). Progress in the treatment of hereditary metabolic disease is thus better than it was, but it is still only a partial success. The advances are attributable to greater success with organ and tissue transplantation, better pharmacotherapy, and better support systems. Restoration of normal homeostasis, the key to successful treatment, remains an elusive challenge and is a logical, major focus for research in human genetics.
7668247	Very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: molecular genetics of a mitochondrial membrane enzyme.
7847381	Molecular studies of chromosomal mosaicism: relative frequency of chromosome gain or loss and possible role of cell selection. Studies of uniparental disomy and origin of nonmosaic trisomies indicate that both gain and loss of a chromosome can occur after fertilization. It is therefore of interest to determine both the relative frequency with which gain or loss can contribute to chromosomal mosaicism and whether these frequencies are influenced by selective factors. Thirty-two mosaic cases were examined with molecular markers, to try to determine which was the primary and which was the secondary cell line: 16 cases of disomy/trisomy mosaicism (5 trisomy 8, 2 trisomy 13, 1 trisomy 18, 4 trisomy 21, and 4 involving the X chromosome), 14 cases of 45,X/46,XX, and 2 cases of 45,X/47,XXX. Of the 14 cases of mosaic 45,X/46,XX, chromosome loss from a normal disomic fertilization predominated, supporting the hypothesis that 45,X might be compatible with survival only when the 45,X cell line arises relatively late in development. Most cases of disomy/trisomy mosaicism involving chromosomes 13, 18, 21, and X were also frequently associated with somatic loss of one (or more) chromosome, in these cases from a trisomic fertilization. By contrast, four of the five trisomy 8 cases were consistent with a somatic gain of a chromosome 8 during development from a normal zygote. It is possible that survival of trisomy 8 is also much more likely when the aneuploid cell line arises relatively late in development.
7726181	MtDNA haplogroups in Native Americans.
7611293	A missense mutation (I278T) in the cystathionine beta-synthase gene prevalent in pyridoxine-responsive homocystinuria and associated with mild clinical phenotype. Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by homocystinuria and multisystem clinical disease. Patients responsive to pyridoxine usually have a milder clinical phenotype than do nonresponsive patients, and we studied the molecular pathology of this disorder in an attempt to understand the molecular basis of the clinical variation. We previously reported a T833C transition in exon 8 causing a substitution of threonine for isoleucine at codon 278 (I278T). By PCR amplification and sequencing of exon 8 from genomic DNA we have now detected the I278T mutation in 7 of 11 patients with in vivo pyridoxine responsiveness and in 0 of 27 pyridoxine-nonresponsive patients. Two pyridoxine-responsive patients are homozygous and five are heterozygous for I278T. We have now observed the I278T mutation in 41% (9 of 22) of the independent alleles in pyridoxine-responsive patients of varied ethnic backgrounds. In two of the compound heterozygotes we identified a novel mutation (G139R and E144K) in the other allele. The finding that the two patients who are homozygous for I278T have only ectopia lentis and mild bone demineralization suggests that this mutation is associated with both in vivo pyridoxine responsiveness and mild clinical disease. Compound heterozygous patients who have one copy of this missense mutation are likely to retain some degree of pyridoxine responsiveness.
8533785	No difference in the parental origin of susceptibility HLA class II haplotypes among Norwegian patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
8533759	Phenylketonuria mutation analysis in Northern Ireland: a rapid stepwise approach. We present a multistep approach for the rapid analysis of phenylketonuria (PKU) mutations. In the first step, three common mutations and a polymorphic short tandem repeat (STR) system are rapidly analyzed with a fluorescent multiplex assay. In the second step, minihaplotypes combining STR and VNTR data are used to determine rare mutations likely to be present in an investigated patient, which are then confirmed by restriction enzyme analysis. The remaining mutations are analyzed with denaturant gradient-gel electrophoresis and sequencing. The first two steps together identify both mutations in 90%-95% of PKU patients, and results can be obtained within 2 d. We have investigated 121 Northern Irish families with hyperphenylalaninemia, including virtually all patients born since 1972, and have found 34 different mutations on 241 of the 242 mutant alleles. Three mutations (R408W, I65T, and F39L) account for 57.5% of mutations, while 14 mutations occur with a frequency of 1%-6%. The present analysis system is efficient and inexpensive and is particularly well suited to routine mutation analysis in a diagnostic setting.
7668286	Arylamine N-acetyltransferase (NAT2) mutations and their allelic linkage in unrelated Caucasian individuals: correlation with phenotypic activity. The polymorphic arylamine N-acetyltransferase (NAT2; EC 2.3.1.5) is supposed to be a susceptibility factor for several drug side effects and certain malignancies. A group of 844 unrelated German subjects was genotyped for their acetylation type, and 563 of them were also phenotyped. Seven mutations of the NAT2 gene were evaluated by allele-specific PCR (mutation 341C to T) and PCR-RFLP for mutations at nt positions 191, 282, 481, 590, 803, and 857. From the mutation pattern eight different alleles, including the wild type coding for rapid acetylation and seven alleles coding for slow phenotype, were determined. Four hundred ninety-seven subjects had a genotype of slow acetylation (58.9%; 95% confidence limits 55.5%-62.2%). Phenotypic acetylation capacity was expressed as the ratio of 5-acetylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil and 1-methylxanthine in urine after caffeine intake. Some 6.7% of the cases deviated in genotype and phenotype, but sequencing DNA of these probands revealed no new mutations. Furthermore, linkage pattern of the mutations was always confirmed, as tested in 533 subjects. In vivo acetylation capacity of homozygous wild-type subjects (NAT2*4/*4) was significantly higher than in heterozygous genotypes (P = .001). All mutant alleles showed low in vivo acetylation capacities, including the previously not-yet-defined alleles *5A, *5C, and *13. Moreover, distinct slow genotypes differed significantly among each other, as reflected in lower acetylation capacity of *6A, *7B, and *13 alleles than the group of *5 alleles. The study demonstrated differential phenotypic activity of various NAT2 genes and gives a solid basis for clinical and molecular-epidemiological investigations.
7825575	Likelihood methods for locating disease genes in nonequilibrium populations. Until recently, attempts to map disease genes on the basis of population associations with linked markers have been based on expected values of linkage disequilibrium. These methods suffer from the large variances imposed on disequilibrium measures by the evolutionary process, but a more serious problem for many diseases is that they assume an equilibrium population. For diseases that arose only a few hundred generations ago, it is more appropriate to concentrate on the initial growth phase of the disease. We invoke a Poisson branching process for this early growth, and estimate the likelihood for the recombination fraction between marker and disease loci, on the basis of simulated disease populations. The limits of the resulting support intervals for the recombination fraction vary inversely with the age of the disease in generations. We illustrate the procedure with data on cystic fibrosis and diastrophic dysplasia, for which the method appears appropriate, and for Friedreich ataxia and Huntington disease, for which it does not. A valuable aspect of the method is the ability in some cases to compare likelihoods of the three orders for a disease locus and two linked marker loci.
7825576	Autosomal dominant familial spastic paraplegia: reduction of the FSP1 candidate region on chromosome 14q to 7 cM and locus heterogeneity. Three large pedigrees of German descent with autosomal dominant "pure" familial spastic paraplegia (FSP) were characterized clinically and genetically. Haplotype and linkage analyses, with microsatellites covering the FSP region on chromosome 14q (locus FSP1), were performed. In pedigree W, we found a haplotype that cosegregates with the disease and observed three crossing-over events, reducing the FSP1 candidate region to 7 cM; in addition, the observation of apparent anticipation in this family suggests a trinucleotide repeat expansion as the mutation. In pedigrees D and S, the gene locus could be excluded from the whole FSP1 region, confirming the locus heterogeneity of autosomal dominant FSP.
7887433	Prenatal genetic counseling for hemoglobinopathy carriers: a comparison of primary providers of prenatal care and professional genetic counselors. Health personnel trained in medical genetics are insufficient to meet the demand for genetic services. Methods must be found to enable primary care providers to offer commonly needed genetic services themselves. In our recently reported community-wide prenatal screening program for hemoglobinopathies, 36% of women detected to have a hemoglobinopathy did not come to a tertiary center for counseling and thus may have not benefited from testing. To determine whether the efficiency of the program could be increased if counseling were provided by the prenatal care provider (obstetrician or family practitioner), we developed a pilot training program on the basis of our experience in offering such services and enlisted 68% of regional prenatal care providers to participate. The proportion of patients detected to have a hemoglobinopathy who received counseling was similar in the primary and tertiary provider groups: 59% versus 50%, respectively, for sickle trait, and 69% versus 66%, respectively, for beta-thalassemia trait. Knowledge after counseling was also similar for the primary and tertiary provider groups: 64% versus 66% (mean % correct), respectively, for sickle trait, and 79% versus 78%, respectively, for beta-thalassemia trait. However, the two provider groups significantly differed with regard to whether or not the patient had her partner tested. For sickle trait, it was 25% for the primary providers but 49% for the tertiary providers (P < .001). For beta-thalassemia trait, it was 47% for the primary providers but 78% for the tertiary providers (P < .001).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
7762554	Frequent intragenic deletion of the P gene in Tanzanian patients with type II oculocutaneous albinism (OCA2). Type II oculocutaneous albinism (OCA2) is an autosomal recessive disorder in which the biosynthesis of melanin pigment is reduced in the skin, hair, and eyes. OCA2, which results from mutations of the P gene, is the most frequent type of albinism in African and African-American patients. OCA2 is especially frequent in Tanzania, where it occurs with an incidence of approximately 1/1,400. We have identified abnormalities of the P gene in each of 13 unrelated patients with OCA2 from Tanzania. One of these, a deletion of exon 7, is strongly predominant, accounting for approximately 77% of mutant alleles in this group of patients.
7977368	Mutations in argininosuccinate synthetase mRNA of Japanese patients, causing classical citrullinemia. Citrullinemia is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a genetic deficiency of argininosuccinate synthetase. In order to characterize mutations in Japanese patients with classical citrullinemia, RNA isolated from 10 unrelated patients was reverse-transcribed, and cDNA amplified by PCR was cloned and sequenced. The 10 mutations identified included 6 missense mutations (A118T, A192V, R272C, G280R, R304W, and R363L), 2 mutations associated with an absence of an exon 7 or exon 13, 1 mutation with a deletion of the first 7 bp in exon 16 (which might be caused by abnormal splicing), and 1 mutation with an insertion of 37 bp within exons 15 and 16 in cDNA. The insertion mutation and the five missense mutations (R304W being excluded) are new mutations described in the present paper. These are in addition to 14 mutations (9 missense mutations, 4 mutations associated with an absence of an exon in mRNA, and 1 splicing mutation) that we identified previously in mainly American patients with neonatal citrullinemia. Two of these 20 mutations, a deletion of exon 13 sequence and a 7-bp deletion in exon 16, were common to Japanese and American populations from different ethnic backgrounds; however, other mutations were unique to each population. Furthermore, the presence of a frequent mutation--the exon 7 deletion mutation in mRNA, which accounts for 10 of 23 affected alleles--was demonstrated in Japanese citrullinemia. This differs from the situation in the United States, where there was far greater heterogeneity of mutations.
8116620	Identification of internal variation in the pseudoautosomal VNTR DXYS17, with nonrandom distribution of the alleles on the X and the Y chromosomes. The PCR technique was used to analyze the DXYS17 locus in the pseudoautosomal region of the X and the Y chromosomes. Analysis on an automated DNA sequencer allowed for sensitive and highly accurate typing of 16 different alleles with a size between 480 and 1,100 bp. Two DXYS17 alleles migrated with the same size on agarose or denaturing polyacrylamide gels but with different mobilities on nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels. Sequence analysis showed that, while an identical number of repeats were present in both alleles, differences in the composition of the units were observed. The origin of these differences was found in the 28- and 33-bp units, which only had a specific repeat pattern at the 5' and 3' ends of the region. The genotype distribution for DXYS17 in a Caucasian population did not deviate from the values expected under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. However, the frequency of one allele and one genotype was significantly different between males and females. Segregation analysis showed that this difference was the result of a nonrandom distribution of certain alleles on the sex chromosomes in males.
7942859	The power of interval mapping of quantitative trait loci, using selected sib pairs. The interval-mapping procedure of Fulker and Cardon for analysis of a quantitative-trait loci (QTL) is extended for application to selected samples of sib pairs. Phenotypic selection of sib pairs, which is known to yield striking increases in power when a single marker is used, provides further increases in power when the interval-mapping approach is used. The greatest benefits of the combined approach are apparent with coarse maps, where QTLs of relatively modest (15%-20%) heritability can be detected with widely spaced markers (40-60 cM apart) in reasonably sized sibling samples. Useful information concerning QTL location is afforded by interval mapping in both selected and unselected samples.
8037214	A YAC contig encompassing the Treacher Collins syndrome critical region at 5q31.3-32. Treacher Collins syndrome (TCOF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder of craniofacial development the features of which include conductive hearing loss and cleft palate. Previous studies have localized the TCOF1 locus between D5S519 (proximal) and SPARC (distal), a region of 22 centirays as estimated by radiation hybrid mapping. In the current investigation we have created a contig across the TCOF1 critical region, using YAC clones. Isolation of a novel short tandem repeat polymorphism corresponding to the end of one of the YACs has allowed us to reduce the size of the critical region to approximately 840 kb, which has been covered with three nonchimeric YACs. Restriction mapping has revealed that the region contains a high density of clustered rare-cutter restriction sites, suggesting that it may contain a number of different genes. The results of the present investigation have further allowed us to confirm that the RPS14 locus lies proximal to the critical region and can thereby be excluded from a role in the pathogenesis of TCOF1, while ANX6 lies within the TCOF1 critical region and remains a potential candidate for the mutated gene.
8304341	Isolation of novel non-HLA gene fragments from the hemochromatosis region (6p21.3) by cDNA hybridization selection. It has previously been shown that cDNA hybridization selection can identify and recover novel genes from large cloned genomic DNA such as cosmids or YACs. In an effort to identify candidate genes for hemochromatosis, this technique was applied to a 320-kb YAC containing the HLA-A gene. A short fragment cDNA library derived from human duodenum was selected with the YAC DNA. Ten novel gene fragments were isolated, characterized, and localized on the physical map of the YAC.
7977356	High-resolution linkage-disequilibrium mapping of the cartilage-hair hypoplasia gene. We recently assigned the gene for an autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia, cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH), to 9p21-p13 in Finnish and Amish families. An association was observed between CHH and alleles at D9S163 in both family series, suggesting that these loci are in linkage disequilibrium and close to each other. Here we extended these studies by exploiting the linkage-disequilibrium information that can be obtained from families with a single affected child, and we studied 66 Finnish CHH families with seven microsatellite markers. The analysis based on the Luria and Delbrck (1943) method and adapted to the study of human founder populations suggests that the distance between CHH and D9S163 is approximately 0.3 cM. An eight-point linkage analysis modified to take advantage of all possible information in 15 Finnish and 17 Amish families was capable of narrowing the likely location of CHH to within an interval of 1.7 cM on a male map. The peak lod score of 54.92 was attained 0.03 and 0.1 cM proximal to D9S163 on the male and female maps, respectively. These results confirm the power of genetic resolution, that lies in the study of linkage disequilibrium in well-defined founder populations with one major ancestral disease mutation.
8178820	Detection of mutations of the RB1 gene in retinoblastoma patients by using exon-by-exon PCR-SSCP analysis. Most sporadic cases of retinoblastoma, malignant eye tumor of children, may require the identification of a mutation of the retinoblastoma gene (RB1 gene) for precise genetic counseling. We established a mutation detection system of and screened for the RB1 gene mutation in 24 patients with retinoblastoma--12 bilateral patients and 12 unilateral patients. Mutation analysis was performed by PCR-mediated SSCP analysis in the entire coding region and promoter region, as an initial screening method, followed by direct genomic sequencing. Possible oncogenic mutations were identified in 14 (58%) of 24 tumors, of which 6 were single base substitutions, 4 were small deletions, 3 were small insertions, and 1 was a complex alteration due to deletion-insertion. A constitutional somatic mosaicism was suggested in one bilateral patient. A majority (57%) of mutations were found in E1A binding domains, and all were presumed to truncate the normal gene products. The mutation analysis presented here may provide a basis for the screening system of RB1 gene mutations in retinoblastoma patients.
7977360	Molecular characterization of de novo secondary trisomy 13. Unbalanced Robertsonian translocations are a significant cause of mental retardation and fetal wastage. The majority of homologous rearrangements of chromosome 21 in Down syndrome have been shown to be isochromosomes. Aside from chromosome 21, very little is known about other acrocentric homologous rearrangements. In this study, four cases of de novo secondary trisomy 13 are presented. FISH using alpha-satellite sequences, rDNA, and a pTRI-6 satellite I sequence specific to the short arm of chromosome 13 showed all four rearrangements to be dicentric and apparently devoid of ribosomal genes. Three of four rearrangements retained the pTRI-6 satellite I sequence. Case 1 was the exception, showing a deletion of this sequence in the rearrangement, although both parental chromosomes 13 had strong positive hybridization signals. Eleven microsatellite markers from chromosome 13 were also used to characterize the rearrangements. Of the four possible outcomes, one maternal Robertsonian translocation, two paternal isochromosomes, and one maternal isochromosome were observed. A double recombination was observed in the maternally derived rob(13q13q). No recombination events were detected in any isochromosome. The parental origins and molecular chromosomal structure of these cases are compared with previous studies of de novo acrocentric rearrangements.
8037216	Comparison of statistics for candidate-gene association studies using cases and parents. Studies of association between candidate genes and disease can be designed to use cases with disease, and in place of nonrelated controls, their parents. The advantage of this design is the elimination of spurious differences due to ethnic differences between cases and nonrelated controls. However, several statistical methods of analysis have been proposed in the literature, and the choice of analysis is not always clear. We review some of the statistical methods currently developed and present two new statistical methods aimed at specific genetic hypotheses of dominance and recessivity of the candidate gene. These new methods can be more powerful than other current methods, as demonstrated by simulations. The basis of these new statistical methods is a likelihood approach. The advantage of the likelihood framework is that regression models can be developed to assess genotype-environment interactions, as well as the relative contribution that alleles at the candidate-gene locus make to the relative risk (RR) of disease. This latter development allows testing of (1) whether interactions between alleles exist, on the scale of log RR, and (2) whether alleles originating from the mother or father of a case impart different risks, i.e., genomic imprinting.
8080001	Regression to the mean does not exclude anticipation and unstable DNA disease.
8079996	Design and sample-size considerations in the detection of linkage disequilibrium with a disease locus. The presence of linkage disequilibrium between closely linked loci can aid in the fine mapping of disease loci. We investigate the power of several designs for sampling individuals with different disease genotypes. As expected, haplotype data provide the greatest power for detecting disequilibrium, but, in the absence of parental information to resolve the phase of double heterozygotes, the most powerful design samples only individuals homozygous at the trait locus. For rare diseases, such a scheme is generally not feasible, and we also provide power and sample-size calculations for designs that sample heterozygotes. The results provide information useful in planning disequilibrium studies.
7977378	High-resolution meiotic and physical mapping of the best vitelliform macular dystrophy (VMD2) locus to pericentromeric chromosome 11. Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (VMD2) has previously been linked to several microsatellite markers from chromosome 11. Subsequently, additional genetic studies have refined the Best disease region to a 3.7-cM interval flanked by markers at D11S903 and PYGM. To further narrow the interval containing the Best disease gene and to obtain an estimate of the physical size of the minimal candidate region, we used a combination of high-resolution PCR hybrid mapping and analysis of recombinant Best disease chromosomes. We identified six markers from within the D11S903-PYGM interval that show no recombination with the defective gene in three multigeneration Best disease pedigrees. Our hybrid panel localizes these markers on either side of the centromere on chromosome 11. The closest markers flanking the disease gene are at D11S986 in band p12-11.22 on the short arm and at D11S480 in band q13.2-13.3 on the proximal long arm. This study demonstrates that the physical size of the Best disease region is exceedingly larger than previously estimated from the genetic data, because of the proximity of the defective gene to the centromere of chromosome 11.
8023855	Small marker X chromosomes lack the X inactivation center: implications for karyotype/phenotype correlations. The abnormal phenotype and/or mental retardation seen in persons with small marker X (mar(X)) chromosomes has been hypothesized to be due to the loss of the X inactivation center (XIC) at Xq13.2, resulting in two active copies of genes in the pericentromeric region. In order to define precisely the DNA content of mar(X) chromosomes and to correlate phenotype with karyotype, we studied small mar(X) chromosomes, using FISH with probes in the juxtacentromeric region. One of the probes was a 40-kb genomic cosmid for the XIST gene, which maps to the smallest interval known to contain the XIC and is thought to be involved in X inactivation. Our findings reveal that small mar(X) chromosomes do not include the XIC and therefore cannot be subject to X inactivation, supporting the premise that abnormal dosage of expressed genes in the pericentromeric region of the X generates the aberrant phenotype seen in patients with small mar(X) chromosomes.
7912883	The genetics of human limb development.
8198127	The genetic locus for free sialic acid storage disease maps to the long arm of chromosome 6. Salla disease (SD), or adult-type free sialic acid storage disease, is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder characterized by impaired transport of free sialic acid across the lysosomal membrane and severe psychomotor retardation. Random linkage analysis of a sample of 27 Finnish families allowed us to localize the SD locus to the long arm of chromosome 6. The highest lod score of 8.95 was obtained with a microsatellite marker of locus D6S286 at theta = .00. Evidence for linkage disequilibrium was observed between the SD locus and the alleles of three closely linked markers, suggesting that the length of the critical region for the SD locus is in the order of 190 kb.
8279475	Refining the locus for Best vitelliform macular dystrophy and mutation analysis of the candidate gene ROM1. Vitelliform macular dystrophy (Best disease) is an autosomal dominant macular dystrophy which shares important clinical features with age-related macular degeneration, the most common cause of legal blindness in the elderly. Unfortunately, our understanding and treatment for this common age-related disorder is limited. Discovery of the gene which causes Best disease has the potential to increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of all types of macular degeneration, including the common age-related form. Best disease has recently been mapped to chromosome 11q13. The photoreceptor-specific protein ROM1 has also been recently mapped to this location, and the ROM1 gene is a candidate gene for Best disease. Using highly polymorphic markers, we have narrowed the genetic region which contains the Best disease gene to the 10-cM region between markers D11S871 and PYGM. Marker D11S956 demonstrated no recombinants with Best disease in three large families and resulted in a lod score of 18.2. In addition, a polymorphism within the ROM1 gene also demonstrated no recombinants and resulted in a lod score of 10.0 in these same three families. We used a combination of SSCP analysis, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, and DNA sequencing to screen the entire coding region of the ROM1 gene in 11 different unrelated patients affected with Best disease. No nucleotide changes were found in the coding sequence of any affected patient, indicating that mutations within the coding sequence are unlikely to cause Best disease.
8116617	Paternal isodisomy for chromosome 5 in a child with spinal muscular atrophy. Paternal isodisomy for chromosome 5 was detected in a 2-year-old boy with type III spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), an autosomal recessive degenerative disorder of alpha motor neurons, known to map to 5q11.2-13.3. Examination of 17 short-sequence repeat polymorphisms spanning 5p15.1-15.3 to 5q33.3-qter produced no evidence of maternally inherited alleles. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal male karyotype, and FISH with probes closely flanking the SMA locus confirmed the presence of two copies of chromosome 5. No developmental abnormalities, other than those attributable to classical childhood-onset SMA, were present. While the absence of a maternally derived chromosome 5 could have produced the symptoms of SMA through the mechanisms of genomic imprinting, the lack of more global developmental abnormalities would be unusual. Paternal transmission of two copies of a defective gene at the SMA locus seems to be the most likely cause of disease, but proof of this will have to await the identification of the SMA gene. While uniparental isodisomy is a rare event, it must be considered as a possible mechanism involved in SMA when conducting prenatal testing and counseling for this disorder.
8198126	Notes on individual sequence variation in humans: immunoglobulin kappa light chain. Little is known concerning the magnitude of variability in the nucleic acid sequence of DNA at the individual level. We have collected a large set of sequence data from the human immunoglobulin kappa light-chain-locus constant region (10,444 bp) and subgroup IV variable region (18,580 bp). For the constant region, absolute conservation of sequence was observed, even in intron and coding-region silent sites, with the exception of one previously defined polymorphic site. For the variable region, 12 heterozygous positions were identified, giving a heterozygosity of 6 x 10(-4) per nucleotide site. The amount of nucleic acid sequence variation differs significantly (chi 2 = 4.88) between these two regions, and the observed variation is two orders of magnitude lower than that reported for two Drosophila melanogaster loci. These data suggest that, for at least some regions of the human genome, nucleic acid sequence may be less variable than previously estimated.
8304350	Apolipoprotein E polymorphism influences postprandial retinyl palmitate but not triglyceride concentrations. To quantify the effect of the apolipoprotein (apo) E polymorphism on the magnitude of postprandial lipemia, we have defined its role in determining the response to a single high-fat meal in a large sample of (N = 474) individuals taking part in the biethnic Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study. The profile of postprandial response in plasma was monitored over 8 h by triglyceride, triglyceride-rich lipoprotein (TGRL)-triglyceride, apo B-48/apo B-100 ratio, and retinyl palmitate concentrations, and the apo E polymorphism was determined by DNA amplification and digestion. The frequency of the apo E alleles and their effects on fasting lipid levels in this sample were similar to those reported elsewhere. Postprandial plasma retinyl palmitate response to a high-fat meal with vitamin A was significantly different among apo E genotypes, with delayed clearance in individuals with an epsilon 2 allele, compared with epsilon 3/3 and epsilon 3/4 individuals. In the sample of 397 Caucasians, average retinyl palmitate response was 1,489 micrograms/dl in epsilon 2/3 individuals, compared with 1,037 micrograms/dl in epsilon 3/3 individuals and 1,108 micrograms/dl in epsilon 3/4 individuals. The apo E polymorphism accounted for 7.1% of the interindividual variation in postprandial retinyl palmitate response, a contribution proportionally greater than its well-known effect on fasting LDL-cholesterol. However, despite this effect on postprandial retinyl palmitate, the profile of postprandial triglyceride response was not significantly different among apo E genotypes. The profile of postprandial response was consistent between the sample of Caucasians and a smaller sample of black subjects. While these data indicate that the removal of remnant particles from circulation is delayed in subjects with the epsilon 2/3 genotype, there is no reported evidence that the epsilon 2 allele predisposes to coronary artery disease (CAD). The results of this study provide not only a reliable estimate of the magnitude of the effect of the apo E polymorphism on various measurements commonly used to characterize postprandial lipemia, but also provide mechanistic insight into the effects of the apo E gene polymorphism on postprandial lipemia and CAD.
7977348	Familial site-specific ovarian cancer is linked to BRCA1 on 17q12-21. In a study of nine families with "site-specific" ovarian cancer (criterion: three or more cases of epithelial ovarian cancer and no cases of breast cancer diagnosed at age < 50 years) we have obtained evidence of linkage to the breast-ovarian cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA1 on 17q12-21. If the risk of cancer in these families is assumed to be restricted to the ovary, the best estimate of the proportion of families linked to BRCA1 is .78 (95% confidence interval .32-1.0). If predisposition to both breast and ovarian cancer is assumed, the proportion linked is 1.0 (95% confidence interval .46-1.0). The linkage of familial site-specific ovarian cancer to BRCA1 indicates the possibility of predictive testing in such families; however, this is only appropriate in families where the evidence for linkage to BRCA1 is conclusive.
15195659	Modes of action of HLA-DR susceptibility specificities in multiple sclerosis.
14658095	Linkage at 12q24 with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is established and confirmed in Hispanic and European American families. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, complex, and systemic human autoimmune disease, with both an environmental component and a heritable predisposition. Clinical studies, reinforced by epidemiology and genetics, show impressive variation in disease severity, expression, prevalence, and incidence by ethnicity and sex. To identify the novel SLE susceptibility loci, we performed a genomewide scan with 318 markers on 37 multiplex Hispanic families, using a nonparametric penetrance-independent affected-only allele-sharing method. Three chromosomal regions (12q24, 16p13, and 16q12-21) exceeded our predetermined threshold (Zlr>2.32; nominal P<.01) for further evaluation. Suspected linkages at 12q24, 16p13, and 16q12-21 were tested in an independent data set consisting of 92 European American (EA-1) and 55 African American (AA) families. The linkage at 12q24 was replicated in EA-1 (Zlr=3.06; P=.001) but not in AA (Zlr=0.37; P=.35). Although neither the 16p13 nor the 16q12-21 was confirmed in EA-1 or AA, the suggestive linkage (Zlr=3.06; P=.001) at 16q12-21 is sufficient to confirm the significant linkage, reported elsewhere, at this location. The evidence for linkage at 12q24 in the 129 combined (Hispanic and EA-1) families exceeded the threshold for genomewide significance (Zlr=4.39; P=5.7x10-6; nonparametric LOD=4.19). Parametric linkage analyses suggested a low-penetrance, dominant model (LOD=3.72). To confirm the linkage effect at 12q24, we performed linkage analysis in another set of 82 independent European American families (EA-2). The evidence for linkage was confirmed (Zlr=2.11; P=.017). Therefore, our results have detected, established, and confirmed the existence of a novel SLE susceptibility locus at 12q24 (designated "SLEB4") that may cause lupus, especially in Hispanic and European American families.
14872408	Linkage analysis of extremely discordant and concordant sibling pairs identifies quantitative trait loci influencing variation in human menopausal age. Age at natural menopause may be used as parameter for evaluating the rate of ovarian aging. Environmental factors determine only a small part of the large variation in menopausal age. Studies have shown that genetic factors are likely to be involved in variation in menopausal age. To identify quantitative-trait loci for this trait, we performed a genomewide linkage study with age at natural menopause as a continuous quantitative phenotype in Dutch sister pairs, through use of a selective sampling scheme. A total of 165 families were ascertained using extreme selected sampling and were genotyped for 417 markers. Data were analyzed by Haseman-Elston regression and by an adjusted variance-components analysis. Subgroup analyses for early and late menopausal age were conducted by Haseman-Elston regression. In the adjusted variance-components analysis, 12 chromosomes had a LOD score of > or =1.0. Two chromosomal regions showed suggestive linkage: 9q21.3 (LOD score 2.6) and Xp21.3 (LOD score 3.1). Haseman-Elston regression showed rather similar locations of the peaks but yielded lower LOD scores. A permutation test to obtain empirical P values resulted in a significant peak on the X chromosome. To our knowledge, this is the first study to attempt to identify loci responsible for variability in menopausal age and in which several chromosomal regions were identified with suggestive and significant linkage. Although the finding of the region on the X chromosome comes as no surprise, because of its widespread involvement in premature ovarian failure, the definition of which particular gene is involved is of great interest. The region on chromosome 9 deserves further consideration. Both findings require independent confirmation.
15338458	Conventional multipoint nonparametric linkage analysis is not necessarily inherently biased.
15154114	High prevalence of SLC6A8 deficiency in X-linked mental retardation. A novel X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) syndrome was recently identified, resulting from creatine deficiency in the brain caused by mutations in the creatine transporter gene, SLC6A8. We have studied the prevalence of SLC6A8 mutations in a panel of 290 patients with nonsyndromic XLMR archived by the European XLMR Consortium. The full-length open reading frame and splice sites of the SLC6A8 gene were investigated by DNA sequence analysis. Six pathogenic mutations, of which five were novel, were identified in a total of 288 patients with XLMR, showing a prevalence of at least 2.1% (6/288). The novel pathogenic mutations are a nonsense mutation (p.Y317X) and four missense mutations. Three missense mutations (p.G87R, p.P390L, and p.P554L) were concluded to be pathogenic on the basis of conservation, segregation, chemical properties of the residues involved, as well as the absence of these and any other missense mutation in 276 controls. For the p.C337W mutation, additional material was available to biochemically prove (i.e., by increased urinary creatine : creatinine ratio) pathogenicity. In addition, we found nine novel polymorphisms (IVS1+26G-->A, IVS7+37G-->A, IVS7+87A-->G, IVS7-35G-->A, IVS12-3C-->T, IVS2+88G-->C, IVS9-36G-->A, IVS12-82G-->C, and p.Y498) that were present in the XLMR panel and/or in the control panel. Two missense variants (p.V629I and p.M560V) that were not highly conserved and were not associated with increased creatine : creatinine ratio, one translational silent variant (p.L472), and 10 intervening sequence variants or untranslated region variants (IVS6+9C-->T, IVS7-151_152delGA, IVS7-99C-->A, IVS8-35G-->A, IVS8+28C-->T, IVS10-18C-->T, IVS11+21G-->A, IVS12+15C-->T, *207G-->C, IVS12+32C-->A) were found only in the XLMR panel but should be considered as unclassified variants or as a polymorphism (p.M560V). Our data indicate that the frequency of SLC6A8 mutations in the XLMR population is close to that of CGG expansions in FMR1, the gene responsible for fragile-X syndrome.
14740322	PBAT: tools for family-based association studies.
15386213	Statistical tests for admixture mapping with case-control and cases-only data. Admixture mapping is a promising new tool for discovering genes that contribute to complex traits. This mapping approach uses samples from recently admixed populations to detect susceptibility loci at which the risk alleles have different frequencies in the original contributing populations. Although the idea for admixture mapping has been around for more than a decade, the genomic tools are only now becoming available to make this a feasible and attractive option for complex-trait mapping. In this article, we describe new statistical methods for analyzing multipoint data from admixture-mapping studies to detect "ancestry association." The new test statistics do not assume a particular disease model; instead, they are based simply on the extent to which the sample's ancestry proportions at a locus deviate from the genome average. Our power calculations show that, for loci at which the underlying risk-allele frequencies are substantially different in the ancestral populations, the power of admixture mapping can be comparable to that of association mapping but with a far smaller number of markers. We also show that, although "ancestry informative markers" (AIMs) are superior to random single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), random SNPs can perform quite well when AIMs are not available. Hence, researchers who study admixed populations in which AIMs are not available can perform admixture mapping with the use of modestly higher densities of random markers. Software to perform the gene-mapping calculations, "MALDsoft," is freely available on the Pritchard Lab Web site.
15114531	Genetic signatures of strong recent positive selection at the lactase gene. In most human populations, the ability to digest lactose contained in milk usually disappears in childhood, but in European-derived populations, lactase activity frequently persists into adulthood (Scrimshaw and Murray 1988). It has been suggested (Cavalli-Sforza 1973; Hollox et al. 2001; Enattah et al. 2002; Poulter et al. 2003) that a selective advantage based on additional nutrition from dairy explains these genetically determined population differences (Simoons 1970; Kretchmer 1971; Scrimshaw and Murray 1988; Enattah et al. 2002), but formal population-genetics-based evidence of selection has not yet been provided. To assess the population-genetics evidence for selection, we typed 101 single-nucleotide polymorphisms covering 3.2 Mb around the lactase gene. In northern European-derived populations, two alleles that are tightly associated with lactase persistence (Enattah et al. 2002) uniquely mark a common (~77%) haplotype that extends largely undisrupted for >1 Mb. We provide two new lines of genetic evidence that this long, common haplotype arose rapidly due to recent selection: (1) by use of the traditional F(ST) measure and a novel test based on p(excess), we demonstrate large frequency differences among populations for the persistence-associated markers and for flanking markers throughout the haplotype, and (2) we show that the haplotype is unusually long, given its high frequency--a hallmark of recent selection. We estimate that strong selection occurred within the past 5,000-10,000 years, consistent with an advantage to lactase persistence in the setting of dairy farming; the signals of selection we observe are among the strongest yet seen for any gene in the genome.
15309688	The Longue Dure of genetic ancestry: multiple genetic marker systems and Celtic origins on the Atlantic facade of Europe. Celtic languages are now spoken only on the Atlantic facade of Europe, mainly in Britain and Ireland, but were spoken more widely in western and central Europe until the collapse of the Roman Empire in the first millennium a.d. It has been common to couple archaeological evidence for the expansion of Iron Age elites in central Europe with the dispersal of these languages and of Celtic ethnicity and to posit a central European "homeland" for the Celtic peoples. More recently, however, archaeologists have questioned this "migrationist" view of Celtic ethnogenesis. The proposition of a central European ancestry should be testable by examining the distribution of genetic markers; however, although Y-chromosome patterns in Atlantic Europe show little evidence of central European influence, there has hitherto been insufficient data to confirm this by use of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Here, we present both new mtDNA data from Ireland and a novel analysis of a greatly enlarged European mtDNA database. We show that mtDNA lineages, when analyzed in sufficiently large numbers, display patterns significantly similar to a large fraction of both Y-chromosome and autosomal variation. These multiple genetic marker systems indicate a shared ancestry throughout the Atlantic zone, from northern Iberia to western Scandinavia, that dates back to the end of the last Ice Age.
15338459	"Bias toward the null" means reduced power.
15359380	Genetic variation in radiation-induced expression phenotypes. Studies have demonstrated that natural variation in the expression level of genes at baseline is extensive, and the determinants of this variation can be mapped by a genetic-linkage approach. In this study, we used lymphoblastoid cells to explore the variation in radiation-induced transcriptional changes. We found that, among normal individuals, there is extensive variation in transcriptional response to radiation exposure. By studying monozygotic twins, we demonstrated that there is evidence of a heritable component to this variation. The postradiation variation in the expression level of several genes, including the ferredoxin reductase gene (FDXR) and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A gene (CDKN1A), is significantly greater (P<.001) among twin pairs than within twin pairs. The induction of FDXR by radiation showed a bimodal distribution. Our findings have important implications for understanding the genetic basis of radiation response, which has remained largely unknown due to the lack of family material needed for genetic studies. Our approach, which uses expression phenotypes in cell lines, allows us to expose cells from family members to radiation. Similar study design can be applied to dissect the genetic basis of other complex human traits.
15514891	Polymorphisms in the sclerosteosis/van Buchem disease gene (SOST) region are associated with bone-mineral density in elderly whites. Osteoporosis has a strong genetic component, but the genes involved are poorly defined. We studied whether the sclerosteosis/van Buchem disease gene (SOST) is an osteoporosis-risk gene by examining its association with bone-mineral density (BMD). Mutations in SOST result in sclerosteosis, and alterations in the SOST gene expression may be causal in the closely related van Buchem disease. We used a set of eight polymorphisms from the SOST gene region to genotype 1,939 elderly men and women from a large population-based prospective-cohort study of Dutch whites. A 3-bp insertion (f=0.38) in the presumed SOST promoter region (SRP3) was associated with decreased BMD in women at the femoral neck (FN) (P=.05) and lumbar spine (LS) (P=.01), with evidence of an allele-dose effect in the oldest age group (P=.006). Similarly, a G variant (f=0.40) in the van Buchem deletion region (SRP9) was associated with increased BMD in men at the FN (P=.007) and LS (P=.02). In both cases, differences between extreme genotypes reached 0.2 SD. We observed no genotype effects on fracture risk, for the 234 osteoporotic fractures validated during 8.2 years of follow-up and for the 146 vertebral prevalent fractures analyzed. We did not find association between any of several frequent haplotypes across the SOST gene region and BMD. We did find evidence of additive effects of SRP3 with the COLIA1 Sp1 polymorphism but not with haplotypes of 3' polymorphisms in the vitamin-D receptor gene. The SOST-COLIA1 additive effect increased with age and reached 0.5 SD difference in BMD at LS in the oldest age group (P=.02). The molecular mechanism whereby these moderate SOST genotype effects are mediated remains to be elucidated, but it is likely to involve differences in regulation of SOST gene expression.
15053010	2003 Curt Stern Award address. On low expectation exceeded; or, the genomic salvation of the Y chromosome.
15154117	A common haplotype of the nicotine acetylcholine receptor alpha 4 subunit gene is associated with vulnerability to nicotine addiction in men. Nicotine is the major addictive substance in cigarettes, and genes involved in sensing nicotine are logical candidates for vulnerability to nicotine addiction. We studied six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CHRNA4 gene and four SNPs in the CHRNB2 gene with respect to nicotine dependence in a collection of 901 subjects (815 siblings and 86 parents) from 222 nuclear families with multiple nicotine-addicted siblings. The subjects were assessed for addiction by both the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) and the Revised Tolerance Questionnaire (RTQ). Because only 5.8% of female offspring were smokers, only male subjects were included in the final analyses (621 men from 206 families). Univariate (single-marker) family-based association tests (FBATs) demonstrated that variant alleles at two SNPs, rs1044396 and rs1044397, in exon 5 of the CHRNA4 gene were significantly associated with a protective effect against nicotine addiction as either a dichotomized trait or a quantitative phenotype (i.e., age-adjusted FTND and RTQ scores), which was consistent with the results of the global haplotype FBAT. Furthermore, the haplotype-specific FBAT showed a common (22.5%) CHRNA4 haplotype, GCTATA, which was significantly associated with both a protective effect against nicotine addiction as a dichotomized trait (Z=-3.04, P<.005) and significant decreases of age-adjusted FTND (Z=-3.31, P<.005) or RTQ scores (Z=-2.73, P=.006). Our findings provide strong evidence suggesting a common CHRNA4 haplotype might be protective against vulnerability to nicotine addiction in men.
15208783	Genomewide linkage scan for bipolar-disorder susceptibility loci among Ashkenazi Jewish families. The relatively short history of linkage studies in bipolar disorders (BPs) has produced inconsistent findings. Implicated regions have been large, with reduced levels of significance and modest effect sizes. Both phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity may have contributed to the failure to define risk loci. BP is part of a spectrum of apparently familial affective disorders, which have been organized by severity. Heterogeneity may arise because of insufficient data to define the spectrum boundaries, and, in general, the less-severe disorders are more difficult to diagnose reliably. To address the inherent complexities in detecting BP susceptibility loci, we have used restricted diagnostic classifications and a genetically more homogeneous (Ashkenazi Jewish) family collection to perform a 9-cM autosomal genomewide linkage scan. Although they are genetically more homogeneous, there are no data to suggest that the rate of illness in the Ashkenazim differs from that in other populations. In a genome scan of 41 Ashkenazi pedigrees with a proband affected with bipolar I disorder (BPI) and at least one other member affected with BPI or bipolar II disorder (BPII), we identified four regions suggestive of linkage on chromosomes 1, 3, 11, and 18. Follow-up genotyping showed that the regions on chromosomes 1, 3, and 18 are also suggestive of linkage in a subset of pedigrees limited to relative pairs affected with BPI. Furthermore, our chromosome 18q22 signal (D18S541 and D18S477) overlaps with previous BP findings. This research is being conducted in parallel with our companion study of schizophrenia, in which, by use of an identical approach, we recently reported significant evidence for a schizophrenia susceptibility locus in the Ashkenazim on chromosome 10q22.
14681830	Maternally inherited aminoglycoside-induced and nonsyndromic deafness is associated with the novel C1494T mutation in the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene in a large Chinese family. We report here the characterization of a large Chinese family with maternally transmitted aminoglycoside-induced and nonsyndromic deafness. In the absence of aminoglycosides, some matrilineal relatives in this family exhibited late-onset/progressive deafness, with a wide range of severity and age at onset. Notably, the average age at onset of deafness has changed from 55 years (generation II) to 10 years (generation IV). Clinical data reveal that the administration of aminoglycosides can induce or worsen deafness in matrilineal relatives. The age at the time of drug administration appears to be correlated with the severity of hearing loss experienced by affected individuals. Sequence analysis of mitochondrial DNA in this pedigree identified a homoplasmic C-to-T transition at position 1494 (C1494T) in the 12S rRNA gene. The C1494T mutation is expected to form a novel U1494-1555A base pair, which is in the same position as the C1494-1555G pair created by the deafness-associated A1555G mutation, at the highly conserved A site of 12S rRNA. Exposure to a high concentration of paromomycin or neomycin caused a variable but significant average increase in doubling time in lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from four symptomatic and two asymptomatic individuals in this family carrying the C1494T mutation when compared to four control cell lines. Furthermore, a significant decrease in the rate of total oxygen consumption was observed in the mutant cell lines. Thus, our data strongly support the idea that the A site of mitochondrial 12S rRNA is the primary target for aminoglycoside-induced deafness. These results also strongly suggest that the nuclear background plays a role in the aminoglycoside ototoxicity and in the development of the deafness phenotype associated with the C1494T mutation in the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene.
14691730	The PARK8 locus in autosomal dominant parkinsonism: confirmation of linkage and further delineation of the disease-containing interval. Recently, a new locus (PARK8) for autosomal dominant parkinsonism has been identified in one large Japanese family. Linkage has been shown to a 16-cM centromeric region of chromosome 12, between markers D12S1631 and D12S339. We tested 21 white families with Parkinson disease and an inheritance pattern compatible with autosomal dominant transmission for linkage in this region. Criteria for inclusion were at least three affected individuals in more than one generation. A total of 29 markers were used to saturate the candidate region. One hundred sixty-seven family members were tested (84 affected and 83 unaffected). Under the assumption of heterogeneity and through use of an affecteds-only model, a maximum multipoint LOD score of 2.01 was achieved in the total sample, with an estimated proportion of families with linkage of 0.32. This LOD score is significant for linkage in a replication study and corresponds to a P value of.0047. Two families (family A [German Canadian] and family D [from western Nebraska]) reached significant linkage on their own, with a combined maximum multipoint LOD score of 3.33, calculated with an affecteds-only model (family A: LOD score 1.67, P=.0028; family D: LOD score 1.67, P=.0028). When a penetrance-dependent model was calculated, the combined multipoint LOD score achieved was 3.92 (family A: LOD score 1.68, P=.0027; family D: LOD score 2.24, P=.0007). On the basis of the multipoint analysis for the combined families A and D, the 1-LOD support interval suggests that the most likely disease location is between a CA repeat polymorphism on genomic clone AC025253 (44.5 Mb) and marker D12S1701 (47.7 Mb). Our data provide evidence that the PARK8 locus is responsible for the disease in a subset of families of white ancestry with autosomal dominant parkinsonism, suggesting that it could be a more common locus.
15372378	A mutation in the vesicle-trafficking protein VAPB causes late-onset spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Motor neuron diseases (MNDs) are a group of neurodegenerative disorders with involvement of upper and/or lower motor neurons, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), progressive bulbar palsy, and primary lateral sclerosis. Recently, we have mapped a new locus for an atypical form of ALS/MND (atypical amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [ALS8]) at 20q13.3 in a large white Brazilian family. Here, we report the finding of a novel missense mutation in the vesicle-associated membrane protein/synaptobrevin-associated membrane protein B (VAPB) gene in patients from this family. Subsequently, the same mutation was identified in patients from six additional kindreds but with different clinical courses, such as ALS8, late-onset SMA, and typical severe ALS with rapid progression. Although it was not possible to link all these families, haplotype analysis suggests a founder effect. Members of the vesicle-associated proteins are intracellular membrane proteins that can associate with microtubules and that have been shown to have a function in membrane transport. These data suggest that clinically variable MNDs may be caused by a dysfunction in intracellular membrane trafficking.
15449241	Family-based association study of synapsin II and schizophrenia. Synapsin II has been proposed as a candidate gene for vulnerability to schizophrenia on the basis of its function and its location in a region of the genome implicated by linkage studies in families with schizophrenia. We recently reported positive association of synapsin II with schizophrenia in a case-control study (Chen et al. 2004). However, since case-control analyses can generate false-positive results in the presence of minor degrees of population stratification, we have performed a replication study in 366 additional Han Chinese probands and their parents by use of analyses of transmission/disequilibrium for three in/del markers and three single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Positive association was observed for rs2307981 (P =.02), rs2308169 (P =.005), rs308963 (P =.002), rs795009 (P =.02), and rs2307973 (P =.02). For transmission of six-marker haplotypes, the global P value was.0000016 (5 degrees of freedom), principally because of overtransmission of the most common haplotype, CAA/-/G/T/C/- (frequency 53.6%; chi (2) = 20.8; P =.0000051). This confirms our previous study and provides further support for the role of synapsin II variants in susceptibility to schizophrenia.
15272417	A major lung cancer susceptibility locus maps to chromosome 6q23-25. Lung cancer is a major cause of death in the United States and other countries. The risk of lung cancer is greatly increased by cigarette smoking and by certain occupational exposures, but familial factors also clearly play a major role. To identify susceptibility genes for familial lung cancer, we conducted a genomewide linkage analysis of 52 extended pedigrees ascertained through probands with lung cancer who had several first-degree relatives with the same disease. Multipoint linkage analysis, under a simple autosomal dominant model, of all 52 families with three or more individuals affected by lung, throat, or laryngeal cancer, yielded a maximum heterogeneity LOD score (HLOD) of 2.79 at 155 cM on chromosome 6q (marker D6S2436). A subset of 38 pedigrees with four or more affected individuals yielded a multipoint HLOD of 3.47 at 155 cM. Analysis of a further subset of 23 multigenerational pedigrees with five or more affected individuals yielded a multipoint HLOD score of 4.26 at the same position. The 14 families with only three affected relatives yielded negative LOD scores in this region. A predivided samples test for heterogeneity comparing the LOD scores from the 23 multigenerational families with those from the remaining families was significant (P=.007). The 1-HLOD multipoint support interval from the multigenerational families extends from C6S1848 at 146 cM to 164 cM near D6S1035, overlapping a genomic region that is deleted in sporadic lung cancers as well as numerous other cancer types. Parametric linkage and variance-components analysis that incorporated effects of age and personal smoking also supported linkage in this region, but with somewhat diminished support. These results localize a major susceptibility locus influencing lung cancer risk to 6q23-25.
21549336	Nonsense mutations in SMPX, encoding a protein responsive to physical force, result in X-chromosomal hearing loss. The fact that hereditary hearing loss is the most common sensory disorder in humans is reflected by, among other things, an extraordinary allelic and nonallelic genetic heterogeneity. X-chromosomal hearing impairment represents only a minor fraction of all cases. In a study of a Spanish family the locus for one of the X-chromosomal forms was assigned to Xp22 (DFNX4). We mapped the disease locus in the same chromosomal region in a large German pedigree with X-chromosomal nonsyndromic hearing impairment by using genome-wide linkage analysis. Males presented with postlingual hearing loss and onset at ages 3-7, whereas onset in female carriers was in the second to third decades. Targeted DNA capture with high-throughput sequencing detected a nonsense mutation in the small muscle protein, X-linked (SMPX) of affected individuals. We identified another nonsense mutation in SMPX in patients from the Spanish family who were previously analyzed to map DFNX4. SMPX encodes an 88 amino acid, cytoskeleton-associated protein that is responsive to mechanical stress. The presence of Smpx in hair cells and supporting cells of the murine cochlea indicates its role in the inner ear. The nonsense mutations detected in the two families suggest a loss-of-function mechanism underlying this form of hearing impairment. Results obtained after heterologous overexpression of SMPX proteins were compatible with this assumption. Because responsivity to physical force is a characteristic feature of the protein, we propose that long-term maintenance of mechanically stressed inner-ear cells critically depends on SMPX function.
21549338	A missense mutation in PRPF6 causes impairment of pre-mRNA splicing and autosomal-dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is an inherited form of retinal degeneration that leads to progressive visual-field constriction and blindness. Although the disease manifests only in the retina, mutations in ubiquitously expressed genes associated with the tri-snRNP complex of the spliceosome have been identified in patients with dominantly inherited RP. We screened for mutations in PRPF6 (NM_012469.3), a gene on chromosome 20q13.33 encoding an essential protein for tri-snRNP assembly and stability, in 188 unrelated patients with autosomal-dominant RP and identified a missense mutation, c.2185C>T (p.Arg729Trp). This change affected a residue that is conserved from humans to yeast and cosegregated with the disease in the family in which it was identified. Lymphoblasts derived from patients with this mutation showed abnormal localization of endogenous PRPF6 within the nucleus. Specifically, this protein accumulated in the Cajal bodies, indicating a possible impairment in the tri-snRNP assembly or recycling. Expression of GFP-tagged PRPF6 in HeLa cells showed that this phenomenon depended exclusively on the mutated form of the protein. Furthermore, analysis of endogenous transcripts in cells from patients revealed intron retention for pre-mRNA bearing specific splicing signals, according to the same pattern displayed by lymphoblasts with mutations in other PRPF genes. Our results identify PRPF6 as the sixth gene involved in pre-mRNA splicing and dominant RP, corroborating the hypothesis that deficiencies in the spliceosome play an important role in the molecular pathology of this disease.
21944045	Denisova admixture and the first modern human dispersals into Southeast Asia and Oceania. It has recently been shown that ancestors of New Guineans and Bougainville Islanders have inherited a proportion of their ancestry from Denisovans, an archaic hominin group from Siberia. However, only a sparse sampling of populations from Southeast Asia and Oceania were analyzed. Here, we quantify Denisova admixture in 33 additional populations from Asia and Oceania. Aboriginal Australians, Near Oceanians, Polynesians, Fijians, east Indonesians, and Mamanwa (a "Negrito" group from the Philippines) have all inherited genetic material from Denisovans, but mainland East Asians, western Indonesians, Jehai (a Negrito group from Malaysia), and Onge (a Negrito group from the Andaman Islands) have not. These results indicate that Denisova gene flow occurred into the common ancestors of New Guineans, Australians, and Mamanwa but not into the ancestors of the Jehai and Onge and suggest that relatives of present-day East Asians were not in Southeast Asia when the Denisova gene flow occurred. Our finding that descendants of the earliest inhabitants of Southeast Asia do not all harbor Denisova admixture is inconsistent with a history in which the Denisova interbreeding occurred in mainland Asia and then spread over Southeast Asia, leading to all its earliest modern human inhabitants. Instead, the data can be most parsimoniously explained if the Denisova gene flow occurred in Southeast Asia itself. Thus, archaic Denisovans must have lived over an extraordinarily broad geographic and ecological range, from Siberia to tropical Asia.
21665001	Hereditary leukonychia, or porcelain nails, resulting from mutations in PLCD1. Hereditary leukonychia (porcelain nails or white nails) is a rare nail disorder with an unknown genetic basis. To identify variants in a gene underlying this phenotype, we identified four families of Pakistani origin showing features of hereditary leukonychia. All 20 nails of each affected individual were chalky and white in appearance, consistent with total leukonychia, with no other cutaneous, appendageal, or systemic findings. By using Affymetrix 10K chip, we established linkage to chromosome 3p21.3-p22 with a LOD score (Z) of 5.1. We identified pathogenic mutations in PLCD1 in all four families, which encodes phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C delta 1 subunit, a key enzyme in phosphoinositide metabolism. We then identified localization of PLCD1 in the nail matrix. It was recently shown that PLCD1 is a component of the human nail plate by proteomic analysis and is localized in the matrix of human nails. Furthermore, mutations detected in PLCD1 resulted in reduced enzymatic activity invitro. Our data show that mutations in PLCD1 underlie hereditary leukonychia, revealing a gene involved in molecular control of nail growth.
21782149	Mutations in ANKRD11 cause KBG syndrome, characterized by intellectual disability, skeletal malformations, and macrodontia. KBG syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability associated with macrodontia of the upper central incisors as well as distinct craniofacial findings, short stature, and skeletal anomalies. Although believed to be genetic in origin, the specific underlying defect is unknown. Through whole-exome sequencing, we identified deleterious heterozygous mutations in ANKRD11 encoding ankyrin repeat domain 11, also known as ankyrin repeat-containing cofactor 1. A splice-site mutation, c.7570-1G>C (p.Glu2524_Lys2525del), cosegregated with the disease in a family with three affected members, whereas in a simplex case a de novo truncating mutation, c.2305delT (p.Ser769GlnfsX8), was detected. Sanger sequencing revealed additional de novo truncating ANKRD11 mutations in three other simplex cases. ANKRD11 is known to interact with nuclear receptor complexes to modify transcriptional activation. We demonstrated that ANKRD11 localizes mainly to the nuclei of neurons and accumulates in discrete inclusions when neurons are depolarized, suggesting that it plays a role in neural plasticity. Our results demonstrate that mutations in ANKRD11 cause KBG syndrome and outline a fundamental role of ANKRD11 in craniofacial, dental, skeletal, and central nervous system development and function.
21376301	Estimating missing heritability for disease from genome-wide association studies. Genome-wide association studies are designed to discover SNPs that are associated with a complex trait. Employing strict significance thresholds when testing individual SNPs avoids false positives at the expense of increasing false negatives. Recently, we developed a method for quantitative traits that estimates the variation accounted for when fitting all SNPs simultaneously. Here we develop this method further for case-control studies. We use a linear mixed model for analysis of binary traits and transform the estimates to a liability scale by adjusting both for scale and for ascertainment of the case samples. We show by theory and simulation that the method is unbiased. We apply the method to data from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium and show that a substantial proportion of variation in liability for Crohn disease, bipolar disorder, and type I diabetes is tagged by common SNPs.
21636067	X-linked congenital hypertrichosis syndrome is associated with interchromosomal insertions mediated by a human-specific palindrome near SOX3. X-linked congenital generalized hypertrichosis (CGH), an extremely rare condition characterized by universal overgrowth of terminal hair, was first mapped to chromosome Xq24-q27.1 in a Mexican family. However, the underlying genetic defect remains unknown. We ascertained a large Chinese family with an X-linked congenital hypertrichosis syndrome combining CGH, scoliosis, and spina bifida and mapped the disease locus to a 5.6 Mb critical region within the interval defined by the previously reported Mexican family. Through the combination of a high-resolution copy-number variation (CNV) scan and targeted genomic sequencing, we identified an interchromosomal insertion at Xq27.1 of a 125,577bp intragenic fragment of COL23A1 on 5q35.3, with one X breakpoint within and the other very close to a human-specific short palindromic sequence located 82 kb downstream of SOX3. In the Mexican family, we found an interchromosomal insertion at the same Xq27.1 site of a 300,036bp genomic fragment on 4q31.2, encompassing PRMT10 and TMEM184C and involving parts of ARHGAP10 and EDNRA. Notably, both of the two X breakpoints were within the short palindrome. The two palindrome-mediated insertions fully segregate with the CGH phenotype in each of the families, and the CNV gains of the respective autosomal genomic segments are not present in the public database and were not found in 1274 control individuals. Analysis of control individuals revealed deletions ranging from 173bp to 9104bp at the site of the insertions with no phenotypic consequence. Taken together, our results strongly support the pathogenicity of the identified insertions and establish X-linked congenital hypertrichosis syndrome as a genomic disorder.
21835305	Microcephaly with simplified gyration, epilepsy, and infantile diabetes linked to inappropriate apoptosis of neural progenitors. We describe a syndrome of primary microcephaly with simplified gyral pattern in combination with severe infantile epileptic encephalopathy and early-onset permanent diabetes in two unrelated consanguineous families with at least three affected children. Linkage analysis revealed a region on chromosome 18 with a significant LOD score of 4.3. In this area, two homozygous nonconserved missense mutations in immediate early response 3 interacting protein 1 (IER3IP1) were found in patients from both families. IER3IP1 is highly expressed in the fetal brain cortex and fetal pancreas and is thought to be involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress response. We reported one of these families previously in a paper on Wolcott-Rallison syndrome (WRS). WRS is characterized by increased apoptotic cell death as part of an uncontrolled unfolded protein response. Increased apoptosis has been shown to be a cause of microcephaly inanimal models. An autopsy specimen from one patient showed increased apoptosis in the cerebral cortex and pancreas beta cells, implicating premature cell death as the pathogenetic mechanism. Both patient fibroblasts and control fibroblasts treated with siRNA specific for IER3IP1 showed an increased susceptibility to apoptotic cell death under stress conditions in comparison to controls. This directly implicates IER3IP1 in the regulation of cell survival. Identification of IER3IP1 mutations sheds light on the mechanisms of brain development and on the pathogenesis of infantile epilepsy and early-onset permanent diabetes.
21473986	Human and mouse mutations in WDR35 cause short-rib polydactyly syndromes due to abnormal ciliogenesis. Defects in cilia formation and function result in a range of human skeletal and visceral abnormalities. Mutations in several genes have been identified to cause a proportion of these disorders, some of which display genetic (locus) heterogeneity. Mouse models are valuable for dissecting the function of these genes, as well as for more detailed analysis of the underlying developmental defects. The short-rib polydactyly (SRP) group of disorders are among the most severe human phenotypes caused by cilia dysfunction. We mapped the disease locus from two siblings affected by a severe form of SRP to 2p24, where we identified an in-frame homozygous deletion of exon 5 in WDR35. We subsequently found compound heterozygous missense and nonsense mutations in WDR35 in an independent second case with a similar, severe SRP phenotype. In a mouse mutation screen for developmental phenotypes, we identified a mutation in Wdr35 as the cause of midgestation lethality, with abnormalities characteristic of defects in the Hedgehog signaling pathway. We show that endogenous WDR35 localizes to cilia and centrosomes throughout the developing embryo and that human and mouse fibroblasts lacking the protein fail to produce cilia. Through structural modeling, we show that WDR35 has strong homology to the COPI coatamers involved in vesicular trafficking and that human SRP mutations affect key structural elements in WDR35. Our report expands, and sheds new light on, the pathogenesis of the SRP spectrum of ciliopathies.
21549343	Whole-Exome sequencing identifies FAM20A mutations as a cause of amelogenesis imperfecta and gingival hyperplasia syndrome. Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) describes a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders of biomineralization resulting from failure of normal enamel formation. AI is found as an isolated entity or as part of a syndrome, and an autosomal-recessive syndrome associating AI and gingival hyperplasia was recently reported. Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified a homozygous nonsense mutation in exon 2 of FAM20A that was not present in the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism database (dbSNP), the 1000 Genomes database, or the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) Diversity Panel. Expression analyses indicated that Fam20a is expressed in ameloblasts and gingivae, providing biological plausibility for mutations in FAM20A underlying the pathogenesis of this syndrome.
22036171	Mutations in POLR3A and POLR3B encoding RNA Polymerase III subunits cause an autosomal-recessive hypomyelinating leukoencephalopathy. Congenital hypomyelinating disorders are a heterogeneous group of inherited leukoencephalopathies characterized by abnormal myelin formation. We have recently reported a hypomyelinating syndrome characterized by diffuse cerebral hypomyelination with cerebellar atrophy and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum (HCAHC). We performed whole-exome sequencing of three unrelated individuals with HCAHC and identified compound heterozygous mutations in POLR3B in two individuals. The mutations include a nonsense mutation, a splice-site mutation, and two missense mutations at evolutionally conserved amino acids. Using reverse transcription-PCR and sequencing, we demonstrated that the splice-site mutation caused deletion of exon 18 from POLR3B mRNA and that the transcript harboring the nonsense mutation underwent nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. We also identified compound heterozygous missense mutations in POLR3A in the remaining individual. POLR3A and POLR3B encode the largest and second largest subunits of RNA Polymerase III (Pol III), RPC1 and RPC2, respectively. RPC1 and RPC2 together form the active center of the polymerase and contribute to the catalytic activity of the polymerase. Pol III is involved in the transcription of small noncoding RNAs, such as 5S ribosomal RNA and all transfer RNAs (tRNA). We hypothesize that perturbation of Pol III target transcription, especially of tRNAs, could be a common pathological mechanism underlying POLR3A and POLR3B mutations.
22100073	Blood pressure loci identified with a gene-centric array. Raised blood pressure (BP) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Previous studies have identified 47 distinct genetic variants robustly associated with BP, but collectively these explain only a few percent of the heritability for BP phenotypes. To find additional BP loci, we used a bespoke gene-centric array to genotype an independent discovery sample of 25,118 individuals that combined hypertensive case-control and general population samples. We followed up four SNPs associated with BP at our p < 8.56 10(-7) study-specific significance threshold and six suggestively associated SNPs in a further 59,349 individuals. We identified and replicated a SNP at LSP1/TNNT3, a SNP at MTHFR-NPPB independent (r(2) = 0.33) of previous reports, and replicated SNPs at AGT and ATP2B1 reported previously. An analysis of combined discovery and follow-up data identified SNPs significantly associated with BP at p < 8.56 10(-7) at four further loci (NPR3, HFE, NOS3, and SOX6). The high number of discoveries made with modest genotyping effort can be attributed to using a large-scale yet targeted genotyping array and to the development of a weighting scheme that maximized power when meta-analyzing results from samples ascertained with extreme phenotypes, in combination with results from nonascertained or population samples. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and transcript expression data highlight potential gene regulatory mechanisms at the MTHFR and NOS3 loci. These results provide candidates for further study to help dissect mechanisms affecting BP and highlight the utility of studying SNPs and samples that are independent of those studied previously even when the sample size is smaller than that in previous studies.
21397065	Autosomal-recessive posterior microphthalmos is caused by mutations in PRSS56, a gene encoding a trypsin-like serine protease. Posterior microphthalmos (MCOP) is a rare isolated developmental anomaly of the eye characterized by extreme hyperopia due to short axial length. The population of the Faroe Islands shows a high prevalence of an autosomal-recessive form (arMCOP) of the disease. Based on published linkage data, we refined the position of the disease locus (MCOP6) in an interval of 250 kb in chromosome 2q37.1 in two large Faroese families. We detected three different mutations in PRSS56. Patients of the Faroese families were either homozygous for c.926G>C (p.Trp309Ser) or compound heterozygous for c.926G>C and c.526C>G (p.Arg176Gly), whereas a homozygous 1bp duplication (c.1066dupC) was identified in five patients with arMCOP from a consanguineous Tunisian family. In one patient with MCOP from the Faroe Islands and in another one from Turkey, no PRSS56 mutation was detected, suggesting nonallelic heterogeneity of the trait. Using RT-PCR, PRSS56 transcripts were detected in samples derived from the human adult retina, cornea, sclera, and optic nerve. The expression of the mouse ortholog could be first detected in the eye at E17 and was maintained into adulthood. The predicted PRSS56 protein is a 603 amino acid long secreted trypsin-like serine peptidase. The c.1066dupC is likely to result in a functional null allele, whereas the two point mutations predict the replacement of evolutionary conserved and functionally important residues. Molecular modeling of the p.Trp309Ser mutant suggests that both the affinity and reactivity of the enzyme toward invivo protein substrates are likely to be substantially reduced.
21565291	Gain-of-function mutations of ARHGAP31, a Cdc42/Rac1 GTPase regulator, cause syndromic cutis aplasia and limb anomalies. Regulation of cell proliferation and motility is essential for normal development. The Rho family of GTPases plays a critical role in the control of cell polarity and migration by effecting the cytoskeleton, membrane trafficking, and cell adhesion. We investigated a recognized developmental disorder, Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS), characterized by the combination of aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) andterminal transverse limb defects (TTLD). Through a genome-wide linkage analysis, we detected a locus for autosomal-dominant ACC-TTLD on 3q generating a maximum LOD score of 4.93 at marker rs1464311. Candidate-gene- and exome-based sequencing led to the identification of independent premature truncating mutations in the terminal exon of the Rho GTPase-activating protein 31 gene, ARHGAP31, which encodes a Cdc42/Rac1 regulatory protein. Mutant transcripts are stable and increase ARHGAP31 activity invitro through a gain-of-function mechanism. Constitutively active ARHGAP31 mutations result in a loss of available active Cdc42 and consequently disrupt actin cytoskeletal structures. Arhgap31 expression in the mouse is substantially restricted to the terminal limb buds and craniofacial processes during early development; these locations closely mirror the sites of impaired organogenesis that characterize this syndrome. These data identify the requirement for regulated Cdc42 and/or Rac1 signaling processes during early human development.
21565292	Random-effects model aimed at discovering associations in meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies. Meta-analysis is an increasingly popular tool for combining multiple different genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in a single aggregate analysis in order to identify associations with very small effect sizes. Because the data of a meta-analysis can be heterogeneous, referring to the differences in effect sizes between the collected studies, what is often done in the literature is to apply both the fixed-effects model (FE) under an assumption of the same effect size between studies and the random-effects model (RE) under an assumption of varying effect size between studies. However, surprisingly, RE gives less significant p values than FE at variants that actually show varying effect sizes between studies. This is ironic because RE is designed specifically for the case in which there is heterogeneity. As a result, usually, RE does not discover any associations that FE did not discover. In this paper, we show that the underlying reason for this phenomenon is that RE implicitly assumes a markedly conservative null-hypothesis model, and we present a new random-effects model that relaxes the conservative assumption. Unlike the traditional RE, the new method is shown to achieve higher statistical power than FE when there is heterogeneity, indicating that the new method has practical utility for discovering associations in the meta-analysis of GWASs.
21529752	The essential role of centrosomal NDE1 in human cerebral cortex neurogenesis. We investigated three families whose offspring had extreme microcephaly at birth and profound mental retardation. Brain scans and postmortem data showed that affected individuals had brains less than 10% of expected size (10 standard deviation) and that in addition to a massive reduction in neuron production they displayed partially deficient cortical lamination (microlissencephaly). Otherbody systems were apparently unaffected and overall growth was normal. We found two distinct homozygous mutations of NDE1, c.83+1G>T (p.Ala29GlnfsX114) in a Turkish family and c.684_685del (p.Pro229TrpfsX85) in two families of Pakistani origin. Using patient cells, we found that c.83+1G>T led to the use of a novel splice site and to a frameshift after NDE1 exon 2. Transfection of tagged NDE1 constructs showed that the c.684_685del mutation resulted in a NDE1 that was unable to localize to the centrosome. By staining a patient-derived cell line that carried the c.83+1G>T mutation, we found that this endogeneously expressed mutated protein equally failed to localize to the centrosome. By examining human and mouse embryonic brains, we determined that NDE1 is highly expressed in neuroepithelial cells of the developing cerebral cortex, particularly at the centrosome. We show that NDE1 accumulates on the mitotic spindle of apical neural precursors in early neurogenesis. Thus, NDE1 deficiency causes both a severe failure of neurogenesis and a deficiency in cortical lamination. Our data further highlight the importance of the centrosome in multiple aspects of neurodevelopment.
21353196	Exome sequencing identifies truncating mutations in human SERPINF1 in autosomal-recessive osteogenesis imperfecta. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous genetic disorder characterized by bone fragility and susceptibility to fractures after minimal trauma. After mutations in all known OI genes had been excluded by Sanger sequencing, we applied next-generation sequencing to analyze the exome of a single individual who has a severe form of the disease and whose parents are second cousins. A total of 26,922 variations from the human reference genome sequence were subjected to several filtering steps. In addition, we extracted the genotypes of all dbSNP130-annotated SNPs from the exome sequencing data and used these 299,494 genotypes as markers for the genome-wide identification of homozygous regions. A single homozygous truncating mutation, affecting SERPINF1 on chromosome 17p13.3, that was embedded into a homozygous stretch of 2.99 Mb remained. The mutation was also homozygous in the affected brother of the index patient. Subsequently, we identified homozygosity for two different truncating SERPINF1 mutations in two unrelated patients with OI and parental consanguinity. All four individuals with SERPINF1 mutations have severe OI. Fractures of long bones and severe vertebral compression fractures with resulting deformities were observed as early as the first year of life in these individuals. Collagen analyses with cultured dermal fibroblasts displayed no evidence for impaired collagen folding, posttranslational modification, or secretion. SERPINF1 encodes pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), a secreted glycoprotein of the serpin superfamily. PEDF is a multifunctional protein and one of the strongest inhibitors of angiogenesis currently known in humans. Our data provide genetic evidence for PEDF involvement in human bone homeostasis.
21376300	Excess of de novo deleterious mutations in genes associated with glutamatergic systems in nonsyndromic intellectual disability. Little is known about the genetics of nonsyndromic intellectual disability (NSID). We hypothesized that de novo mutations (DNMs) in synaptic genes explain an important fraction of sporadic NSID cases. In order to investigate this possibility, we sequenced 197 genes encoding glutamate receptors and a large subset of their known interacting proteins in 95 sporadic cases of NSID. We found 11 DNMs, including ten potentially deleterious mutations (three nonsense, two splicing, one frameshift, four missense) and one neutral mutation (silent) in eight different genes. Calculation of point-substitution DNM rates per functional and neutral site showed significant excess of functional DNMs compared to neutral ones. De novo truncating and/or splicing mutations in SYNGAP1, STXBP1, and SHANK3 were found in six patients and are likely to be pathogenic. De novo missense mutations were found in KIF1A, GRIN1, CACNG2, and EPB41L1. Functional studies showed that all these missense mutations affect protein function in cell culture systems, suggesting that they may be pathogenic. Sequencing these four genes in 50 additional sporadic cases of NSID identified a second DNM in GRIN1 (c.1679_1681dup/p.Ser560dup). This mutation also affects protein function, consistent with structural predictions. None of these mutations or any other DNMs were identified in these genes in 285 healthy controls. This study highlights the importance of the glutamate receptor complexes in NSID and further supports the role of DNMs in this disorder.
21665002	A congenital muscular dystrophy with mitochondrial structural abnormalities caused by defective de novo phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis. Congenital muscular dystrophy is a heterogeneous group of inherited muscle diseases characterized clinically by muscle weakness and hypotonia in early infancy. A number of genes harboring causative mutations have been identified, but several cases of congenital muscular dystrophy remain molecularly unresolved. We examined 15 individuals with a congenital muscular dystrophy characterized by early-onset muscle wasting, mental retardation, and peculiar enlarged mitochondria that are prevalent toward the periphery of the fibers but are sparse in the center on muscle biopsy, and we have identified homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding choline kinase beta (CHKB). This is the first enzymatic step in a biosynthetic pathway for phosphatidylcholine, the most abundant phospholipid in eukaryotes. In muscle of three affected individuals with nonsense mutations, choline kinase activities were undetectable, and phosphatidylcholine levels were decreased. We identified the human disease caused by disruption of a phospholipid de novo biosynthetic pathway, demonstrating the pivotal role of phosphatidylcholine in muscle and brain.
21194677	Identification of a systemic lupus erythematosus susceptibility locus at 11p13 between PDHX and CD44 in a multiethnic study. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is considered to be the prototypic autoimmune disease, with a complex genetic architecture influenced by environmental factors. We sought to replicate a putative association at 11p13 not yet exceeding genome-wide significance (p < 5  10(-8)) identified in a genome-wide association study (GWAS). Our GWA scan identified two intergenic SNPs located between PDHX and CD44 showing suggestive evidence of association with SLE in cases of European descent (rs2732552, p = 0.004, odds ratio [OR] = 0.78; rs387619, p = 0.003, OR = 0.78). The replication cohort consisted of >15,000 subjects, including 3562 SLE cases and 3491 controls of European ancestry, 1527 cases and 1811 controls of African American (AA) descent, and 1265 cases and 1260 controls of Asian origin. We observed robust association at both rs2732552 (p = 9.03  10(-8), OR = 0.83) and rs387619 (p = 7.7  10(-7), OR = 0.83) in the European samples with p(meta) = 1.82  10(-9) for rs2732552. The AA and Asian SLE cases also demonstrated association at rs2732552 (p = 5  10(-3), OR = 0.81 and p = 4.3  10(-4), OR = 0.80, respectively). A meta-analysis of rs2732552 for all racial and ethnic groups studied produced p(meta) = 2.36  10(-13). This locus contains multiple regulatory sites that could potentially affect expression and functions of CD44, a cell-surface glycoprotein influencing immunologic, inflammatory, and oncologic phenotypes, or PDHX, a subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
16080112	Differential X reactivation in human placental cells: implications for reversal of X inactivation. X inactivation--the mammalian method of X chromosome dosage compensation--is extremely stable in human somatic cells; only fetal germ cells have a developmental program to reverse the process. The human placenta, at term, differs from other somatic tissues, since it has the ability to reverse the X-inactivation program. To determine whether reversal can be induced at other stages of placental development, we examined earlier placental specimens using a cell-hybridization assay. We found that global X reactivation is also inducible in villi cells from first-trimester spontaneous abortions but not from first-trimester elective terminations. These differences in inducibility are not associated with detectable variation in histone H4 acetylation, DNA methylation, or XIST expression--hallmarks of the inactivation process--so other factors must have a role. One notable feature is that the permissive cells, unlike nonpermissive ones, have ceased to proliferate in vivo and are either beginning or in the process of programmed cell death. Cessation of mitotic proliferation also characterizes oocytes at the stage at which they undergo X reactivation. We suggest that, along with undermethylation, the apoptotic changes accompanying cessation of cell proliferation contribute to the reversal of inactivation, not only in placental cells, but also in oocytes entering meiosis.
15714686	2004 William Allan Award address. Cloning of the DMD gene.
15846561	Heterozygous mutations of OTX2 cause severe ocular malformations. Major malformations of the human eye, including microphthalmia and anophthalmia, are examples of phenotypes that recur in families yet often show no clear Mendelian inheritance pattern. Defining loci by mapping is therefore rarely feasible. Using a candidate-gene approach, we have identified heterozygous coding-region changes in the homeobox gene OTX2 in eight families with ocular malformations. The expression pattern of OTX2 in human embryos is consistent with the eye phenotypes observed in the patients, which range from bilateral anophthalmia to retinal defects resembling Leber congenital amaurosis and pigmentary retinopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging scans revealed defects of the optic nerve, optic chiasm, and, in some cases, brain. In two families, the mutations appear to have occurred de novo in severely affected offspring, and, in two other families, the mutations have been inherited from a gonosomal mosaic parent. Data from these four families support a simple model in which OTX2 heterozygous loss-of-function mutations cause ocular malformations. Four additional families display complex inheritance patterns, suggesting that OTX2 mutations alone may not lead to consistent phenotypes. The high incidence of mosaicism and the reduced penetrance have implications for genetic counseling.
15988677	A combined genomewide linkage scan of 1,233 families for prostate cancer-susceptibility genes conducted by the international consortium for prostate cancer genetics. Evidence of the existence of major prostate cancer (PC)-susceptibility genes has been provided by multiple segregation analyses. Although genomewide screens have been performed in over a dozen independent studies, few chromosomal regions have been consistently identified as regions of interest. One of the major difficulties is genetic heterogeneity, possibly due to multiple, incompletely penetrant PC-susceptibility genes. In this study, we explored two approaches to overcome this difficulty, in an analysis of a large number of families with PC in the International Consortium for Prostate Cancer Genetics (ICPCG). One approach was to combine linkage data from a total of 1,233 families to increase the statistical power for detecting linkage. Using parametric (dominant and recessive) and nonparametric analyses, we identified five regions with "suggestive" linkage (LOD score >1.86): 5q12, 8p21, 15q11, 17q21, and 22q12. The second approach was to focus on subsets of families that are more likely to segregate highly penetrant mutations, including families with large numbers of affected individuals or early age at diagnosis. Stronger evidence of linkage in several regions was identified, including a "significant" linkage at 22q12, with a LOD score of 3.57, and five suggestive linkages (1q25, 8q13, 13q14, 16p13, and 17q21) in 269 families with at least five affected members. In addition, four additional suggestive linkages (3p24, 5q35, 11q22, and Xq12) were found in 606 families with mean age at diagnosis of < or = 65 years. Although it is difficult to determine the true statistical significance of these findings, a conservative interpretation of these results would be that if major PC-susceptibility genes do exist, they are most likely located in the regions generating suggestive or significant linkage signals in this large study.
16252239	Severely incapacitating mutations in patients with extreme short stature identify RNA-processing endoribonuclease RMRP as an essential cell growth regulator. The growth of an individual is deeply influenced by the regulation of cell growth and division, both of which also contribute to a wide variety of pathological conditions, including cancer, diabetes, and inflammation. To identify a major regulator of human growth, we performed positional cloning in an autosomal recessive type of profound short stature, anauxetic dysplasia. Homozygosity mapping led to the identification of novel mutations in the RMRP gene, which was previously known to cause two milder types of short stature with susceptibility to cancer, cartilage hair hypoplasia, and metaphyseal dysplasia without hypotrichosis. We show that different RMRP gene mutations lead to decreased cell growth by impairing ribosomal assembly and by altering cyclin-dependent cell cycle regulation. Clinical heterogeneity is explained by a correlation between the level and type of functional impairment in vitro and the severity of short stature or predisposition to cancer. Whereas the cartilage hair hypoplasia founder mutation affects both pathways intermediately, anauxetic dysplasia mutations do not affect B-cyclin messenger RNA (mRNA) levels but do severely incapacitate ribosomal assembly via defective endonucleolytic cleavage. Anauxetic dysplasia mutations thus lead to poor processing of ribosomal RNA while allowing normal mRNA processing and, therefore, genetically separate the different functions of RNase MRP.
15526234	Sex-specific genetic architecture of whole blood serotonin levels. Recently, a quantitative-trait locus (QTL) for whole blood serotonin level was identified in a genomewide linkage and association study in a founder population. Because serotonin level is a sexually dimorphic trait, in the present study, we evaluated the sex-specific genetic architecture of whole blood serotonin level in the same population. Here, we use an extended homozygosity-by-descent linkage method that is suitable for large complex pedigrees. Although both males and females have high broad heritability (H2=0.99), females have a higher additive component (h2=0.63 in females; h2=0.27 in males). Furthermore, the serotonin QTL on 17q that was identified previously in this population, integrin beta 3 (ITGB3), and a novel locus on 2q influence serotonin levels only in males, whereas linkage to a region on chromosome 6q is specific to females. Both sexes contribute to linkage signals on 12q and 16p. There were, overall, more associations meeting criteria for suggestive significance in males than in females, including those of ITGB3 and the serotonin transporter gene (5HTT). This analysis is consistent with heritable sexual dimorphism in whole blood serotonin levels resulting from the effects of a combination of sex-specific and sex-independent loci.
15747259	No convincing evidence of linkage for restless legs syndrome on chromosome 9p.
15726498	Position effects due to chromosome breakpoints that map approximately 900 Kb upstream and approximately 1.3 Mb downstream of SOX9 in two patients with campomelic dysplasia. Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is a semilethal skeletal malformation syndrome with or without XY sex reversal. In addition to the multiple mutations found within the sex-determining region Y-related high-mobility group box gene (SOX9) on 17q24.3, several chromosome anomalies (translocations, inversions, and deletions) with breakpoints scattered over 1 Mb upstream of SOX9 have been described. Here, we present a balanced translocation, t(4;17)(q28.3;q24.3), segregating in a family with a mild acampomelic CD with Robin sequence. Both chromosome breakpoints have been identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization and have been sequenced using a somatic cell hybrid. The 17q24.3 breakpoint maps approximately 900 kb upstream of SOX9, which is within the same bacterial artificial chromosome clone as the breakpoints of two other reported patients with mild CD. We also report a prenatal identification of acampomelic CD with male-to-female sex reversal in a fetus with a de novo balanced complex karyotype, 46,XY,t(4;7;8;17)(4qter-->4p15.1::17q25.1-->17qter;7qter-->7p15.3::4p15.1-->4pter;8pter-->8q12.1::7p15.3-->7pter;17pter-->17q25.1::8q12.1-->8qter). Surprisingly, the 17q breakpoint maps approximately 1.3 Mb downstream of SOX9, making this the longest-range position effect found in the field of human genetics and the first report of a patient with CD with the chromosome breakpoint mapping 3' of SOX9. By using the Regulatory Potential score in conjunction with analysis of the rearrangement breakpoints, we identified a candidate upstream cis-regulatory element, SOX9cre1. We provide evidence that this 1.1-kb evolutionarily conserved element and the downstream breakpoint region colocalize with SOX9 in the interphase nucleus, despite being located 1.1 Mb upstream and 1.3 Mb downstream of it, respectively. The potential molecular mechanism responsible for the position effect is discussed.
15776395	Localization of a type 1 diabetes locus in the IL2RA/CD25 region by use of tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms. As part of an ongoing search for genes associated with type 1 diabetes (T1D), a common autoimmune disease, we tested the biological candidate gene IL2RA (CD25), which encodes a subunit (IL-2R alpha) of the high-affinity interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor complex. We employed a tag single-nucleotide polymorphism (tag SNP) approach in large T1D sample collections consisting of 7,457 cases and controls and 725 multiplex families. Tag SNPs were analyzed using a multilocus test to provide a regional test for association. We found strong statistical evidence in the case-control collection (P=6.5x10(-8)) for a T1D locus in the CD25 region of chromosome 10p15 and replicated the association in the family collection (P=7.3x10(-3); combined P=1.3x10(-10)). These results illustrate the utility of tag SNPs in a chromosome-regional test of disease association and justify future fine mapping of the causal variant in the region.
15739154	Molecular and clinical analyses of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and Pallister-Hall syndromes: robust phenotype prediction from the type and position of GLI3 mutations. Mutations in the GLI3 zinc-finger transcription factor gene cause Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), which are variable but distinct clinical entities. We hypothesized that GLI3 mutations that predict a truncated functional repressor protein cause PHS and that functional haploinsufficiency of GLI3 causes GCPS. To test these hypotheses, we screened patients with PHS and GCPS for GLI3 mutations. The patient group consisted of 135 individuals: 89 patients with GCPS and 46 patients with PHS. We detected 47 pathological mutations (among 60 probands); when these were combined with previously published mutations, two genotype-phenotype correlations were evident. First, GCPS was caused by many types of alterations, including translocations, large deletions, exonic deletions and duplications, small in-frame deletions, and missense, frameshift/nonsense, and splicing mutations. In contrast, PHS was caused only by frameshift/nonsense and splicing mutations. Second, among the frameshift/nonsense mutations, there was a clear genotype-phenotype correlation. Mutations in the first third of the gene (from open reading frame [ORF] nucleotides [nt] 1-1997) caused GCPS, and mutations in the second third of the gene (from ORF nt 1998-3481) caused primarily PHS. Surprisingly, there were 12 mutations in patients with GCPS in the 3' third of the gene (after ORF nt 3481), and no patients with PHS had mutations in this region. These results demonstrate a robust correlation of genotype and phenotype for GLI3 mutations and strongly support the hypothesis that these two allelic disorders have distinct modes of pathogenesis.
15580547	Identification of a 3.0-kb major recombination hotspot in patients with Sotos syndrome who carry a common 1.9-Mb microdeletion. Sotos syndrome (SoS) is a congenital dysmorphic disorder characterized by overgrowth in childhood, distinctive craniofacial features, and mental retardation. Haploinsufficiency of the NSD1 gene owing to either intragenic mutations or microdeletions is known to be the major cause of SoS. The common approximately 2.2-Mb microdeletion encompasses the whole NSD1 gene and neighboring genes and is flanked by low-copy repeats (LCRs). Here, we report the identification of a 3.0-kb major recombination hotspot within these LCRs, in which we mapped deletion breakpoints in 78.7% (37/47) of patients with SoS who carry the common microdeletion. The deletion size was subsequently refined to 1.9 Mb. Sequencing of breakpoint fragments from all 37 patients revealed junctions between a segment of the proximal LCR (PLCR-B) and the corresponding region of the distal LCR (DLCR-2B). PLCR-B and DLCR-2B are the only directly oriented regions, whereas the remaining regions of the PLCR and DLCR are in inverted orientation. The PLCR, with a size of 394.0 kb, and the DLCR, with a size of of 429.8 kb, showed high overall homology (approximately 98.5%), with an increased sequence similarity (approximately 99.4%) within the 3.0-kb breakpoint cluster. Several recombination-associated motifs were identified in the hotspot and/or its vicinity. Interestingly, a 10-fold average increase of a translin motif, as compared with the normal distribution within the LCRs, was recognized. Furthermore, a heterozygous inversion of the interval between the LCRs was detected in all fathers of the children carrying a deletion in the paternally derived chromosome. The functional significance of these findings remains to be elucidated. Segmental duplications of the primate genome play a major role in chromosomal evolution. Evolutionary study showed that the duplication of the SoS LCRs occurred 23.3-47.6 million years ago, before the divergence of Old World monkeys.
15570555	Systematic evaluation of genetic variation at the androgen receptor locus and risk of prostate cancer in a multiethnic cohort study. Repeat length of the CAG microsatellite polymorphism in exon 1 of the androgen receptor (AR) gene has been associated with risk of prostate cancer in humans. This association has been the focus of >20 primary epidemiological publications and multiple review articles, but a consistent and reproducible association has yet to be confirmed. We systematically addressed possible causes of false-negative and false-positive association in >4,000 individuals from a multiethnic, prospective cohort study of prostate cancer, comprehensively studying genetic variation by microsatellite genotyping, direct resequencing of exons in advanced cancer cases, and haplotype analysis across the 180-kb AR genomic locus. These data failed to confirm that common genetic variation in the AR gene locus influences risk of prostate cancer. A systematic approach that assesses both coding and noncoding genetic variation in large and diverse patient samples can help clarify hypotheses about association between genetic variants and disease.
16252233	High-resolution identification of chromosomal abnormalities using oligonucleotide arrays containing 116,204 SNPs. Mutation of the human genome ranges from single base-pair changes to whole-chromosome aneuploidy. Karyotyping, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and comparative genome hybridization are currently used to detect chromosome abnormalities of clinical significance. These methods, although powerful, suffer from limitations in speed, ease of use, and resolution, and they do not detect copy-neutral chromosomal aberrations--for example, uniparental disomy (UPD). We have developed a high-throughput approach for assessment of DNA copy-number changes, through use of high-density synthetic oligonucleotide arrays containing 116,204 single-nucleotide polymorphisms, spaced at an average distance of 23.6 kb across the genome. Using this approach, we analyzed samples that failed conventional karyotypic analysis, and we detected amplifications and deletions across a wide range of sizes (1.3-145.9 Mb), identified chromosomes containing anonymous chromatin, and used genotype data to determine the molecular origin of two cases of UPD. Furthermore, our data provided independent confirmation for a case that had been misinterpreted by karyotype analysis. The high resolution of our approach provides more-precise breakpoint mapping, which allows subtle phenotypic heterogeneity to be distinguished at a molecular level. The accurate genotype information provided on these arrays enables the identification of copy-neutral loss-of-heterozygosity events, and the minimal requirement of DNA (250 ng per array) allows rapid analysis of samples without the need for cell culture. This technology overcomes many limitations currently encountered in routine clinical diagnostic laboratories tasked with accurate and rapid diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities.
16380905	Bipolar I disorder and schizophrenia: a 440-single-nucleotide polymorphism screen of 64 candidate genes among Ashkenazi Jewish case-parent trios. Bipolar, schizophrenia, and schizoaffective disorders are common, highly heritable psychiatric disorders, for which familial coaggregation, as well as epidemiological and genetic evidence, suggests overlapping etiologies. No definitive susceptibility genes have yet been identified for any of these disorders. Genetic heterogeneity, combined with phenotypic imprecision and poor marker coverage, has contributed to the difficulty in defining risk variants. We focused on families of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, to reduce genetic heterogeneity, and, as a precursor to genomewide association studies, we undertook a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping screen of 64 candidate genes (440 SNPs) chosen on the basis of previous linkage or of association and/or biological relevance. We genotyped an average of 6.9 SNPs per gene, with an average density of 1 SNP per 11.9 kb in 323 bipolar I disorder and 274 schizophrenia or schizoaffective Ashkenazi case-parent trios. Using single-SNP and haplotype-based transmission/disequilibrium tests, we ranked genes on the basis of strength of association (P<.01). Six genes (DAO, GRM3, GRM4, GRIN2B, IL2RB, and TUBA8) met this criterion for bipolar I disorder; only DAO has been previously associated with bipolar disorder. Six genes (RGS4, SCA1, GRM4, DPYSL2, NOS1, and GRID1) met this criterion for schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder; five replicate previous associations, and one, GRID1, shows a novel association with schizophrenia. In addition, six genes (DPYSL2, DTNBP1, G30/G72, GRID1, GRM4, and NOS1) showed overlapping suggestive evidence of association in both disorders. These results may help to prioritize candidate genes for future study from among the many suspected/proposed for schizophrenia and bipolar disorders. They provide further support for shared genetic susceptibility between these two disorders that involve glutamate-signaling pathways.
15611928	Fine mapping and positional candidate studies identify HLA-G as an asthma susceptibility gene on chromosome 6p21. Asthma affects nearly 14 million people worldwide and has been steadily increasing in frequency for the past 50 years. Although environmental factors clearly influence the onset, progression, and severity of this disease, family and twin studies indicate that genetic variation also influences susceptibility. Linkage of asthma and related phenotypes to chromosome 6p21 has been reported in seven genome screens, making it the most replicated region of the genome. However, because many genes with individually small effects are likely to contribute to risk, identification of asthma susceptibility loci has been challenging. In this study, we present evidence from four independent samples in support of HLA-G as a novel asthma and bronchial hyperresponsiveness susceptibility gene in the human leukocyte antigen region on chromosome 6p21, and we speculate that this gene might contribute to risk for other inflammatory diseases that show linkage to this region.
16380917	Robust estimation of experimentwise P values applied to a genome scan of multiple asthma traits identifies a new region of significant linkage on chromosome 20q13. Over 30 genomic regions show linkage to asthma traits. Six asthma genes have been cloned, but the putative loci in many linked regions have not been identified. To search for asthma susceptibility loci, we performed genomewide univariate linkage analyses of seven asthma traits, using 202 Australian families ascertained through a twin proband. House-dust mite sensitivity (Dpter) exceeded the empirical threshold for significant linkage at 102 cM on chromosome 20q13, near marker D20S173 (empirical pointwise P = .00001 and genomewide P = .005, both uncorrected for multiple-trait testing). Atopy, bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR), and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) were also linked to this region. In addition, 16 regions were linked to at least one trait at the suggestive level, including 12q24, which has consistently shown linkage to asthma traits in other studies. Some regions were expected to be false-positives arising from multiple-trait testing. To address this, we developed a new approach to estimate genomewide significance that accounts for multiple-trait testing and for correlation between traits and that does not require a Bonferroni correction. With this approach, Dpter remained significantly linked to 20q13 (empirical genomewide P = .042), and airway obstruction remained linked to 12q24 at the suggestive level. Finally, we extended this method to show that the linkage of Dpter, atopy, BHR, FEV1, asthma, and airway obstruction to chromosome 20q13 is unlikely to be due to chance and may result from a quantitative trait locus in this region that affects several of these traits.
15712104	Genetic association analysis using data from triads and unrelated subjects. The selection of an appropriate control sample for use in association mapping requires serious deliberation. Unrelated controls are generally easy to collect, but the resulting analyses are susceptible to spurious association arising from population stratification. Parental controls are popular, since triads comprising a case and two parents can be used in analyses that are robust to this stratification. However, parental controls are often expensive and difficult to collect. In some situations, studies may have both parental and unrelated controls available for analysis. For example, a candidate-gene study may analyze triads but may have an additional sample of unrelated controls for examination of background linkage disequilibrium in genomic regions. Also, studies may collect a sample of triads to confirm results initially found using a traditional case-control study. Initial association studies also may collect each type of control, to provide insurance against the weaknesses of the other type. In these situations, resulting samples will consist of some triads, some unrelated controls, and, possibly, some unrelated cases. Rather than analyze the triads and unrelated subjects separately, we present a likelihood-based approach for combining their information in a single combined association analysis. Our approach allows for joint analysis of data from both triad and case-control study designs. Simulations indicate that our proposed approach is more powerful than association tests that are based on each separate sample. Our approach also allows for flexible modeling and estimation of allele effects, as well as for missing parental data. We illustrate the usefulness of our approach using SNP data from a candidate-gene study of psoriasis.
15800845	Quantitative founder-effect analysis of French Canadian families identifies specific loci contributing to metabolic phenotypes of hypertension. The Saguenay-Lac St-Jean population of Quebec is relatively isolated and has genealogical records dating to the 17th-century French founders. In 120 extended families with at least one sib pair affected with early-onset hypertension and/or dyslipidemia, we analyzed the genetic determinants of hypertension and related cardiovascular and metabolic conditions. Variance-components linkage analysis revealed 46 loci after 100,000 permutations. The most prominent clusters of overlapping quantitative-trait loci were on chromosomes 1 and 3, a finding supported by principal-components and bivariate analyses. These genetic determinants were further tested by classifying families by use of LOD score density analysis for each measured phenotype at every 5 cM. Our study showed the founder effect over several generations and classes of living individuals. This quantitative genealogical approach supports the notion of the ancestral causality of traits uniquely present and inherited in distinct family classes. With the founder effect, traits determined within population subsets are measurably and quantitatively transmitted through generational lineage, with a precise component contributing to phenotypic variance. These methods should accelerate the uncovering of causal haplotypes in complex diseases such as hypertension and metabolic syndrome.
15759212	Identifying candidate Hirschsprung disease-associated RET variants. Patients with sporadic Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) show increased allele sharing at markers in the 5' region of the RET locus, indicating the presence of a common ancestral RET mutation. In a previous study, we found a haplotype of six SNPs that was transmitted to 55.6% of our patients, whereas it was present in only 16.2% of the controls we used. Among the patients with that haplotype, 90.8% had it on both chromosomes, which led to a much higher risk of developing HSCR than when the haplotype occurred heterozygously. To more precisely define the HSCR-associated region and to identify candidate disease-associated variant(s), we sequenced the shared common haplotype region from 10 kb upstream of the RET gene through intron 1 and exon 2 (in total, 33 kb) in a patient homozygous for the common risk haplotype and in a control individual homozygous for the most common nonrisk haplotype. A comparison of these sequences revealed 86 sequence differences. Of these 86 variations, 8 proved to be in regions highly conserved among different vertebrates and within putative transcription factor binding sites. We therefore considered these as candidate disease-associated variants. Subsequent genotyping of these eight variants revealed a strong disease association for six of the eight markers. These six markers also showed the largest distortions in allele transmission. Interspecies comparison showed that only one of the six variations was located in a region also conserved in a nonmammalian species, making it the most likely candidate HSCR-associated variant.
15952089	Dysregulation of chondrogenesis in human cleidocranial dysplasia. Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia caused by heterozygosity of mutations in human RUNX2. The disorder is characterized by delayed closure of the fontanel and hypoplastic clavicles that result from defective intramembranous ossification. However, additional features, such as short stature and cone epiphyses, also suggest an underlying defect in endochondral ossification. Here, we report observations of growth-plate abnormalities in a patient with a novel RUNX2 gene mutation, a single C insertion (1228insC), which is predicted to lead to a premature termination codon and thus to haploinsufficiency of RUNX2 and the CCD phenotype. Histological analysis of the rib and long-bone cartilages showed a markedly diminished zone of hypertrophy. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of limb cartilage RNA showed a 5-10-fold decrease in the hypertrophic chondrocyte molecular markers VEGF, MMP13, and COL10A1. Together, these data show that humans with CCD have altered endochondral ossification due to altered RUNX2 regulation of hypertrophic chondrocyte-specific genes during chondrocyte maturation.
11799475	Evidence for a susceptibility gene for anorexia nervosa on chromosome 1. Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa (AN), have a significant genetic component. In the current study, a genomewide linkage analysis of 192 families with at least one affected relative pair with AN and related eating disorders, including bulimia nervosa, was performed, resulting in only modest evidence for linkage, with the highest nonparametric linkage (NPL) score, 1.80, at marker D4S2367 on chromosome 4. Since the reduction of sample heterogeneity would increase power to detect linkage, we performed linkage analysis in a subset (n=37) of families in which at least two affected relatives had diagnoses of restricting AN, a clinically defined subtype of AN characterized by severe limitation of food intake without the presence of binge-eating or purging behavior. When we limited the linkage analysis to this clinically more homogeneous subgroup, the highest multipoint NPL score observed was 3.03, at marker D1S3721 on chromosome 1p. The genotyping of additional markers in this region led to a peak multipoint NPL score of 3.45, thereby providing suggestive evidence for the presence of an AN-susceptibility locus on chromosome 1p.
12145742	Neuregulin 1 and susceptibility to schizophrenia. The cause of schizophrenia is unknown, but it has a significant genetic component. Pharmacologic studies, studies of gene expression in man, and studies of mouse mutants suggest involvement of glutamate and dopamine neurotransmitter systems. However, so far, strong association has not been found between schizophrenia and variants of the genes encoding components of these systems. Here, we report the results of a genomewide scan of schizophrenia families in Iceland; these results support previous work, done in five populations, showing that schizophrenia maps to chromosome 8p. Extensive fine-mapping of the 8p locus and haplotype-association analysis, supplemented by a transmission/disequilibrium test, identifies neuregulin 1 (NRG1) as a candidate gene for schizophrenia. NRG1 is expressed at central nervous system synapses and has a clear role in the expression and activation of neurotransmitter receptors, including glutamate receptors. Mutant mice heterozygous for either NRG1 or its receptor, ErbB4, show a behavioral phenotype that overlaps with mouse models for schizophrenia. Furthermore, NRG1 hypomorphs have fewer functional NMDA receptors than wild-type mice. We also demonstrate that the behavioral phenotypes of the NRG1 hypomorphs are partially reversible with clozapine, an atypical antipsychotic drug used to treat schizophrenia.
12016592	Intron-size constraint as a mutational mechanism in Rothmund-Thomson syndrome. Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by deleterious mutations in the RECQL4 gene on chromosome 8. The RECQL4 gene structure is unusual because it contains many small introns <100 bp. We describe a proband with RTS who has a novel 11-bp intronic deletion, and we show that this mutation results in a 66-bp intron too small for proper splicing. Constraint on intron size may represent a general mutational mechanism, since human-genome analysis reveals that approximately 15% of genes have introns <100 bp and are therefore susceptible to size constraint. Thus, monitoring of intron size may allow detection of mutations missed by exon-by-exon approaches.
12080485	Mutations in two genes encoding different subunits of a receptor signaling complex result in an identical disease phenotype. Polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy (PLOSL), also known as "Nasu-Hakola disease," is a globally distributed recessively inherited disease leading to death during the 5th decade of life and is characterized by early-onset progressive dementia and bone cysts. Elsewhere, we have identified PLOSL mutations in TYROBP (DAP12), which codes for a membrane receptor component in natural-killer and myeloid cells, and also have identified genetic heterogeneity in PLOSL, with some patients carrying no mutations in TYROBP. Here we complete the molecular pathology of PLOSL by identifying TREM2 as the second PLOSL gene. TREM2 forms a receptor signaling complex with TYROBP and triggers activation of the immune responses in macrophages and dendritic cells. Patients with PLOSL have no defects in cell-mediated immunity, suggesting a remarkable capacity of the human immune system to compensate for the inactive TYROBP-mediated activation pathway. Our data imply that the TYROBP-mediated signaling pathway plays a significant role in human brain and bone tissue and provide an interesting example of how mutations in two different subunits of a multisubunit receptor complex result in an identical human disease phenotype.
11951177	High-throughput analysis of subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements by use of array-based comparative genomic hybridization. Telomeric chromosome rearrangements may cause mental retardation, congenital anomalies, and miscarriages. Automated detection of subtle deletions or duplications involving telomeres is essential for high-throughput diagnosis, but impossible when conventional cytogenetic methods are used. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) allows high-resolution screening of copy number abnormalities by hybridizing differentially labeled test and reference genomes to arrays of robotically spotted clones. To assess the applicability of this technique in the diagnosis of (sub)telomeric imbalances, we here describe a blinded study, in which DNA from 20 patients with known cytogenetic abnormalities involving one or more telomeres was hybridized to an array containing a validated set of human-chromosome-specific (sub)telomere probes. Single-copy-number gains and losses were accurately detected on these arrays, and an excellent concordance between the original cytogenetic diagnosis and the array-based CGH diagnosis was obtained by use of a single hybridization. In addition to the previously identified cytogenetic changes, array-based CGH revealed additional telomere rearrangements in 3 of the 20 patients studied. The robustness and simplicity of this array-based telomere copy-number screening make it highly suited for introduction into the clinic as a rapid and sensitive automated diagnostic procedure.
12145749	Order of intron removal influences multiple splice outcomes, including a two-exon skip, in a COL5A1 acceptor-site mutation that results in abnormal pro-alpha1(V) N-propeptides and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type I. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) type I (the classical variety) is a dominantly inherited, genetically heterogeneous connective-tissue disorder. Mutations in the COL5A1 and COL5A2 genes, which encode type V collagen, have been identified in several individuals. Most mutations affect either the triple-helical domain of the protein or the expression of one COL5A1 allele. We identified a novel splice-acceptor mutation (IVS4-2A-->G) in the N-propeptide-encoding region of COL5A1, in one patient with EDS type I. The outcome of this mutation was complex: In the major product, both exons 5 and 6 were skipped; other products included a small amount in which only exon 5 was skipped and an even smaller amount in which cryptic acceptor sites within exon 5 were used. All products were in frame. Pro-alpha1(V) chains with abnormal N-propeptides were secreted and were incorporated into extracellular matrix, and the mutation resulted in dramatic alterations in collagen fibril structure. The two-exon skip occurred in transcripts in which intron 5 was removed rapidly relative to introns 4 and 6, leaving a large (270 nt) composite exon that can be skipped in its entirety. The transcripts in which only exon 5 was skipped were derived from those in which intron 6 was removed prior to intron 5. The use of cryptic acceptor sites in exon 5 occurred in transcripts in which intron 4 was removed subsequent to introns 5 and 6. These findings suggest that the order of intron removal plays an important role in the outcome of splice-site mutations and provide a model that explains why multiple products derive from a mutation at a single splice site.
11813133	A polymorphism in the human UGRP1 gene promoter that regulates transcription is associated with an increased risk of asthma. Several traits associated with asthma phenotypes, such as high total serum immunoglobulin E and bronchial hyperresponsiveness, have been linked by numerous genome-screen studies and linkage analyses to markers on human chromosome 5q31-q34. In the present article, we describe UGRP1 (encoding uteroglobin-related protein 1) as one of asthma-susceptibility genes that is located on chromosome 5q31-q32. UGRP1 is a homodimeric secretory protein of 17 kDa and is expressed only in lung and trachea. The G --> A polymorphism was identified at -112 bp in the human UGRP1 gene promoter. The -112A allele is responsible for a 24% reduction in the promoter activity in relation to the -112G allele, as examined by transfection analysis. Electrophoretic mobility-shift analysis revealed that an unknown nuclear factor binds to the region around -112 bp. The binding affinity with the -112A oligonucleotide was reduced by approximately one half, as compared with the -112G oligonucleotide. In a case-control study using 169 Japanese individuals (84 patients with asthma and 85 healthy control individuals), those with a -112A allele (G/A or A/A) were 4.1 times more likely to have asthma than were those with the wild-type allele (G/G).
11731936	Human-specific duplication and mosaic transcripts: the recent paralogous structure of chromosome 22. In recent decades, comparative chromosomal banding, chromosome painting, and gene-order studies have shown strong conservation of gross chromosome structure and gene order in mammals. However, findings from the human genome sequence suggest an unprecedented degree of recent (<35 million years ago) segmental duplication. This dynamism of segmental duplications has important implications in disease and evolution. Here we present a chromosome-wide view of the structure and evolution of the most highly homologous duplications (> or = 1 kb and > or = 90%) on chromosome 22. Overall, 10.8% (3.7/33.8 Mb) of chromosome 22 is duplicated, with an average sequence identity of 95.4%. To organize the duplications into tractable units, intron-exon structure and well-defined duplication boundaries were used to define 78 duplicated modules (minimally shared evolutionary segments) with 157 copies on chromosome 22. Analysis of these modules provides evidence for the creation or modification of 11 novel transcripts. Comparative FISH analyses of human, chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, and macaque reveal qualitative and quantitative differences in the distribution of these duplications--consistent with their recent origin. Several duplications appear to be human specific, including a approximately 400-kb duplication (99.4%-99.8% sequence identity) that transposed from chromosome 14 to the most proximal pericentromeric region of chromosome 22. Experimental and in silico data further support a pericentromeric gradient of duplications where the most recent duplications transpose adjacent to the centromere. Taken together, these data suggest that segmental duplications have been an ongoing process of primate genome evolution, contributing to recent gene innovation and the dynamic transformation of genome architecture within and among closely related species.
12515255	The ABCA4 gene in autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophies.
11951176	Quantitative trait loci on chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 12, and 18 control variation in levels of T and B lymphocyte subpopulations. Lymphocyte subpopulation levels are used for prognosis and monitoring of a variety of human diseases, especially those with an infectious etiology. As a primary step to defining the major gene variation underlying these phenotypes, we conducted the first whole-genome screen for quantitative variation in lymphocyte count, CD4 T cell, CD8 T cell, B cell, and natural killer cell numbers, as well as CD4:CD8 ratio. The screen was performed in 15 of the CEPH families that form the main human genome genetic project mapping resource. Quantitative-trait loci (QTLs) that account for significant proportions of the phenotypic variance of lymphocyte subpopulations were detected on chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 12, and 18. The most significant QTL found was for CD4 levels on chromosome 8 (empirical P=.00005). Two regions of chromosome 4 showed significant linkage to CD4:CD8 ratio (empirical P=.00007 and P=.003). A QTL for the highly correlated measures of CD4 and CD19 levels colocalized at 18q21 (both P=.003). Similarly, a shared region of chromosome 1 was linked to CD8 and CD19 levels (P=.0001 and P=.002, respectively). Several of the identified chromosome regions are likely to harbor polymorphic candidate genes responsible for these important human phenotypes. Their discovery has important implications for understanding the generation of the immune repertoire and understanding immune-system homeostasis. More generally, these data show the power of an integrated human gene-mapping approach for heritable molecular phenotypes, using large pedigrees that have been extensively genotyped.
12384858	The fingerprint of phantom mutations in mitochondrial DNA data. Phantom mutations are systematic artifacts generated in the course of the sequencing process itself. In sequenced mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), they generate a hotspot pattern quite different from that of natural mutations in the cell. To identify the telltale patterns of a particular phantom mutation process, one first filters out the well-established frequent mutations (inferred from various data sets with additional coding region information). The filtered data are represented by their full (quasi-)median network, to visualize the character conflicts, which can be expressed numerically by the cube spectrum. Permutation tests are used to evaluate the overall phylogenetic content of the filtered data. Comparison with benchmark data sets helps to sort out suspicious data and to infer features and potential causes for the phantom mutation process. This approach, performed either in the lab or at the desk of a reviewer, will help to avoid errors that otherwise would go into print and could lead to erroneous evolutionary interpretations. The filtering procedure is illustrated with two mtDNA data sets that were severely affected by phantom mutations.
12145747	Tibial muscular dystrophy is a titinopathy caused by mutations in TTN, the gene encoding the giant skeletal-muscle protein titin. Tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD) is an autosomal dominant late-onset distal myopathy linked to chromosome 2q31. The linked region includes the giant TTN gene, which encodes the central sarcomeric protein, titin. We have previously shown a secondary calpain-3 defect to be associated with TMD, which further underscored that titin is the candidate. We now report the first mutations in TTN to cause a human skeletal-muscle disease, TMD. In Mex6, the last exon of TTN, a unique 11-bp deletion/insertion mutation, changing four amino acid residues, completely cosegregated with all tested 81 Finnish patients with TMD in 12 unrelated families. The mutation was not found in 216 Finnish control samples. In a French family with TMD, a Leu-->Pro mutation at position 293,357 in Mex6 was discovered. Mex6 is adjacent to the known calpain-3 binding site Mex5 of M-line titin. Immunohistochemical analysis using two exon-specific antibodies directed to the M-line region of titin demonstrated the specific loss of carboxy-terminal titin epitopes in the TMD muscle samples that we studied, thus implicating a functional defect of the M-line titin in the genesis of the TMD disease phenotype.
11781875	2001 ASHG Award for Excellence in Education. Introductory speech for Charles Scriver.
11992269	The power of multivariate quantitative-trait loci linkage analysis is influenced by the correlation between variables.
11822023	Evidence of genetic interaction between the beta-globin complex and chromosome 8q in the expression of fetal hemoglobin. During human development, the switch from fetal to adult hemoglobin (Hb) is not complete with the residual gamma-globin expression being restricted to a subset of erythrocytes termed "F cells" (FC). Statistical analyses have shown the FC trait to be influenced by a common sequence variant (C-->T) at position -158 upstream of the Ggamma-globin gene, termed the "XmnI-Ggamma polymorphism." The XmnI-Ggamma site is believed to be involved in the expression of the Ggamma-globin gene through interaction with transcription factors, and polymorphisms in the transcription factors could be influencing fetal Hb expression, conditional on the XmnI-Ggamma site. Using a two-locus model, in which the second locus was the known quantitative-trait locus (QTL) at the XmnI-Ggamma site, we showed suggestive linkage to chromosome 8q. A maximum single-point LOD score of 4.33 and a multipoint LOD score of 4.75 were found in a 15-20 cM region of chromosome 8q. A single-locus analysis failed to show linkage of FC to the region when the XmnI-Ggamma site was accounted for by removing its effects from the data or including it as a covariate. Results of the single-locus analysis were significant when the effects of the XmnI-Ggamma site were not accounted for in any way. The results of analysis in a large Indian kindred indicate that there is an interaction between the XmnI-Ggamma site and a QTL on chromosome 8q that is influencing the production of fetal Hb.
12145744	The Xq22 inversion breakpoint interrupted a novel Ras-like GTPase gene in a patient with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and profound mental retardation. A male patient with profound mental retardation, athetosis, nystagmus, and severe congenital hypotonia (Duchenne muscular dystrophy [DMD]) was previously shown to carry a pericentric inversion of the X chromosome, 46,Y,inv(X)(p21.2q22.2). His mother carried this inversion on one X allele. The patient's condition was originally misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy, and only later was it diagnosed as DMD. Because the DMD gene is located at Xp21.2, which is one breakpoint of the inv(X), and because its defects are rarely associated with severe mental retardation, the other clinical features of this patient were deemed likely to be associated with the opposite breakpoint at Xq22. Our precise molecular-cytogenetic characterization of both breakpoints revealed three catastrophic genetic events that had probably influenced neuromuscular and cognitive development: deletion of part of the DMD gene at Xp21.2, duplication of the human proteolipid protein gene (PLP) at Xq22.2, and disruption of a novel gene. The latter sequence, showing a high degree of homology to the Sec4 gene of yeast, encoded a putative small guanine-protein, Ras-like GTPase that we have termed "RLGP." Immunocytochemistry located RLGP at mitochondria. We speculate that disruption of RLGP was responsible for the patient's profound mental retardation.
12428213	myotilin Mutation found in second pedigree with LGMD1A. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 1A (LGMD1A [MIM 159000]) is an autosomal dominant form of muscular dystrophy characterized by adult onset of proximal weakness progressing to distal muscle weakness. We have reported elsewhere a mutation in the myotilin gene in a large, North American family of German descent. Here, we report the mutation screening of an additional 86 families with a variety of neuromuscular pathologies. We have identified a new myotilin mutation in an Argentinian pedigree with LGMD1 that is predicted to result in the conversion of serine 55 to phenylalanine (S55F). This mutation has not been found in 392 control chromosomes and is located in the unique N-terminal domain of myotilin, only two residues from the T57I mutation reported elsewhere. Both T57I and S55F are located outside the alpha-actinin and gamma-filamin binding sites within myotilin. The identification of two independent pedigrees with the same disease, each bearing a different mutation in the same gene, has long been the gold standard for establishing a causal relationship between defects in a gene and the resultant disease. As a description of the second known pedigree with LGMD1A, this finding constitutes that gold standard of proof that mutations in the myotilin gene cause LGMD1A.
12058347	Heterozygous submicroscopic inversions involving olfactory receptor-gene clusters mediate the recurrent t(4;8)(p16;p23) translocation. The t(4;8)(p16;p23) translocation, in either the balanced form or the unbalanced form, has been reported several times. Taking into consideration the fact that this translocation may be undetected in routine cytogenetics, we find that it may be the most frequent translocation after t(11q;22q), which is the most common reciprocal translocation in humans. Case subjects with der(4) have the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, whereas case subjects with der(8) show a milder spectrum of dysmorphic features. Two pairs of the many olfactory receptor (OR)-gene clusters are located close to each other, on both 4p16 and 8p23. Previously, we demonstrated that an inversion polymorphism of the OR region at 8p23 plays a crucial role in the generation of chromosomal imbalances through unusual meiotic exchanges. These findings prompted us to investigate whether OR-related inversion polymorphisms at 4p16 and 8p23 might also be involved in the origin of the t(4;8)(p16;p23) translocation. In seven case subjects (five of whom both represented de novo cases and were of maternal origin), including individuals with unbalanced and balanced translocations, we demonstrated that the breakpoints fell within the 4p and 8p OR-gene clusters. FISH experiments with appropriate bacterial-artificial-chromosome probes detected heterozygous submicroscopic inversions of both 4p and 8p regions in all the five mothers of the de novo case subjects. Heterozygous inversions on 4p16 and 8p23 were detected in 12.5% and 26% of control subjects, respectively, whereas 2.5% of them were scored as doubly heterozygous. These novel data emphasize the importance of segmental duplications and large-scale genomic polymorphisms in the evolution and pathology of the human genome.
12424708	Structural and functional characterization of factor H mutations associated with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Genetic studies have demonstrated the involvement of the complement regulator factor H in nondiarrheal, nonverocytotoxin (i.e., atypical) cases of hemolytic uremic syndrome. Different factor H mutations have been identified in 10%-30% of patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), and most of these mutations alter single amino acids in the C-terminal region of factor H. Although these mutations are considered to be responsible for the disease, the precise role that factor H plays in the pathogenesis of aHUS is unknown. We report here the structural and functional characterization of three different factor H proteins purified from the plasma of patients with aHUS who carry the factor H mutations W1183L, V1197A, or R1210C. Structural anomalies in factor H were found only in R1210C carriers; these individuals show, in their plasma, a characteristic high-molecular-weight factor H protein that results from the covalent interaction between factor H and human serum albumin. Most important, all three aHUS-associated factor H proteins have a normal cofactor activity in the proteolysis of fluid-phase C3b by factor I but show very low binding to surface-bound C3b. This functional impairment was also demonstrated in recombinant mutant factor H proteins expressed in COS7 cells. These data support the hypothesis that patients with aHUS carry a specific dysfunction in the protection of cellular surfaces from complement activation, offering new possibilities to improve diagnosis and develop appropriate therapies.
11845408	An autosomal recessive form of bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria maps to chromosome 16q12.2-21. Polymicrogyria is a cerebral cortical malformation that is grossly characterized by excessive cortical folding and microscopically characterized by abnormal cortical layering. Although polymicrogyria appears to have one or more genetic causes, no polymicrogyria loci have been identified. Here we describe the clinical and radiographic features of a new genetic form of polymicrogyria and localize the responsible gene. We studied two consanguineous Palestinian pedigrees with an autosomal recessive form of bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP), using linkage analysis. Five affected children had moderate-to-severe mental retardation, developmental delay, and esotropia, and four of the five affected children developed seizures. Brain magnetic-resonance imaging revealed polymicrogyria that was most prominent in the frontal and parietal lobes but involved other cortical areas as well. A genomewide linkage screen revealed a single locus that was identical by descent in affected children in both families and showed a single disease-associated haplotype, suggesting a common founder mutation. The locus for BFPP maps to chromosome 16q12.2-21, with a minimal interval of 17 cM. For D16S514, the maximal pooled two-point LOD score was 3.98, and the maximal multipoint LOD score was 4.57. This study provides the first genetic evidence that BFPP is an autosomal recessive disorder and serves as a starting point for the identification of the responsible gene.
9718347	Molecular analysis of 9p deletions associated with XY sex reversal: refining the localization of a sex-determining gene to the tip of the chromosome.
9497253	Splice-site mutations: a novel genetic mechanism of Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 1. Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 1 (CN-1) is a recessively inherited, potentially lethal disorder characterized by severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia resulting from deficiency of the hepatic enzyme bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. In all CN-1 patients studied, structural mutations in one of the five exons of the gene (UGT1A1) encoding the uridinediphosphoglucuronate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) isoform bilirubin-UGT1 were implicated in the absence or inactivation of the enzyme. We report two patients in whom CN-1 is caused, instead, by mutations in the noncoding intronic region of the UGT1A1 gene. One patient (A) was homozygous for a G-->C mutation at the splice-donor site in the intron, between exon 1 and exon 2. The other patient (B) was heterozygous for an A-->G shift at the splice-acceptor site in intron 3, and in the second allele a premature translation-termination codon in exon 1 was identified. Bilirubin-UGT1 mRNA is difficult to obtain, since it is expressed in the liver only. To determine the effects of these splice-junction mutations, we amplified genomic DNA of the relevant splice junctions. The amplicons were expressed in COS-7 cells, and the expressed mRNAs were analyzed. In both cases, splice-site mutations led to the use of cryptic splice sites, with consequent deletions in the processed mRNA. This is the first report of intronic mutations causing CN-1 and of the determination of the consequences of these mutations on mRNA structure, by ex vivo expression.
9634522	The 8765delAG mutation in BRCA2 is common among Jews of Yemenite extraction.
9792853	Development and maintenance of ear innervation and function: lessons from mutations in mouse and man.
9463308	Susceptibility to relapsing-progressive multiple sclerosis is associated with inheritance of genes linked to the variable region of the TcR beta locus: use of affected family-based controls. We tested the hypothesis that susceptibility to relapsing-progressive (RP) (but not to relapsing-remitting [RR]) multiple sclerosis (MS) is associated with a gene linked to the TcR beta-chain variable region delimited by the Vbeta8-BamHI and Vbeta11-BamHI RFLP alleles in DRw15+ MS patients, using a contingency-table test of patient data and affected family-based controls. Control alleles and haplotypes were composed of parental marker alleles and haplotypes not transmitted to the affected child, in 90 simplex and 31 multiplex families from British Columbia. A total of 6,164 alleles at 11 loci were segregated through families of probands with RP MS or RR MS. The Vbeta8-Vbeta11 subhaplotype frequencies in the DRw15+ RP MS (but not RR MS) patients differed from control frequencies, because of an increase of the 2-1 subhaplotype (P=.02). Vbeta8-BamHI and Vbeta11-BamHI allele frequencies (P=.05 and .009, respectively) in the DRw15+ RP MS (but not RR MS) patients differed from control frequencies. The Vbeta1-Vbeta8 subhaplotype frequencies in the DRw15- RP MS (but not RR MS) patients differed from control frequencies (P=.03), with a significantly increased frequency of the 1-1 subhaplotype (P=.01; RR=7.1) in RP MS versus RR MS patients. Susceptibility to RP MS is associated both with a recessive inheritance of a gene linked to the 3' (Vbeta11) end of the 2-1 subhaplotype defined by the Vbeta8-BamHI and Vbeta11-BamHI alleles in DRw15+ patients and with a gene, located on the 1-1 subhaplotype, defined by the Vbeta1-TaqI and Vbeta8-MspI alleles of the TcR beta-chain complex in DRw15- patients.
9792882	Prevalence of mutations in TIGR/Myocilin in patients with adult and juvenile primary open-angle glaucoma.
9758627	A missense mutation in the zinc-finger domain of the human hairless gene underlies congenital atrichia in a family of Irish travellers. Congenital atrichia is a rare, recessively inherited form of hair loss affecting both males and females and is characterized by a complete absence of hair follicles. Recently, a mutation in the human hairless gene was implicated in the pathogenesis of congenital atrichia. The human hairless gene encodes a putative single zinc-finger transcription-factor protein with restricted expression in brain and skin, which is believed to regulate catagen remodeling in the hair cycle. In this study, we report the identification of a missense mutation in the zinc-finger domain of the hairless gene in a large inbred family of Irish Travellers with congenital atrichia. The mutated arginine residue is conserved among human, mouse, and rat, suggesting that it is of significant importance to the function of the zinc-finger domain.
9497255	Autosomal genomic scan for loci linked to obesity and energy metabolism in Pima Indians. An autosomal genomic scan to search for linkage to obesity and energy metabolism was completed in Pima Indians, a population prone to obesity. Obesity was assessed by percent body fat (by hydrodensitometry) and fat distribution (the ratio of waist circumference to thigh circumference). Energy metabolism was measured in a respiratory chamber as 24-h metabolic rate, sleeping metabolic rate, and 24-h respiratory quotient (24RQ), an indicator of the ratio of carbohydrate oxidation to fat oxidation. Five hundred sixteen microsatellite markers with a median spacing of 6.4 cM were analyzed, in 362 siblings who had measurements of body composition and in 220 siblings who had measurements of energy metabolism. These comprised 451 sib pairs in 127 nuclear families, for linkage analysis to obesity, and 236 sib pairs in 82 nuclear families, for linkage analysis to energy metabolism. Pointwise and multipoint methods for regression of sib-pair differences in identity by descent, as well as a sibling-based variance-components method, were used to detect linkage. LOD scores >=2 were found at 11q21-q22, for percent body fat (LOD=2.1; P=.001), at 11q23-q24, for 24-h energy expenditure (LOD=2.0; P=.001), and at 1p31-p21 (LOD=2.0) and 20q11.2 (LOD=3.0; P=.0001), for 24RQ, by pointwise and multipoint analyses. With the variance-components method, the highest LOD score (LOD=2.3 P=.0006) was found at 18q21, for percent body fat, and at 1p31-p21 (LOD=2.8; P=.0003), for 24RQ. Possible candidate genes include LEPR (leptin receptor), at 1p31, and ASIP (agouti-signaling protein), at 20q11.2.
9838272	The sib transmission/disequilibrium test is a Mantel-Haenszel test.
9443866	Ataxia-telangiectasia: identification and detection of founder-effect mutations in the ATM gene in ethnic populations. To facilitate the evaluation of ATM heterozygotes for susceptibility to other diseases, such as breast cancer, we have attempted to define the most common mutations and their frequencies in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) homozygotes from 10 ethnic populations. Both genomic mutations and their effects on cDNA were characterized. Protein-truncation testing of the entire ATM cDNA detected 92 (66%) truncating mutations in 140 mutant alleles screened. The haplotyping of patients with identical mutations indicates that almost all of these represent common ancestry and that very few spontaneously recurring ATM mutations exist. Assays requiring minimal amounts of genomic DNA were designed to allow rapid screening for common ethnic mutations. These rapid assays detected mutations in 76% of Costa Rican patients (3), 50% of Norwegian patients (1), 25% of Polish patients (4), and 14% of Italian patients (1), as well as in patients of Amish/Mennonite and Irish English backgrounds. Additional mutations were observed in Japanese, Utah Mormon, and African American patients. These assays should facilitate screening for A-T heterozygotes in the populations studied.
9718346	A gene involved in XY sex reversal is located on chromosome 9, distal to marker D9S1779. The genetic mechanisms involved in sex differentiation are poorly understood, and progress in identification of the genes involved has been slow. The fortuitous finding of chromosomal rearrangements in association with a sex-reversed phenotype has led to the isolation of SRY and SOX9, both shown to be involved in the sex-determining pathway. In addition, duplications of the X chromosome, deletions of chromosomes 9 and 10, and translocations involving chromosome 17 have been reported to be associated with abnormal testicular differentiation, leading to male-to-female sex reversal in 46,XY individuals. We present the cytogenetic and molecular analyses of four sex-reversed XY females, each with gonadal dysgenesis and other variable malformations, and with terminal deletions of distal chromosome 9p, resulting from unbalanced autosomal translocations. PCR amplification and DNA sequence analysis of SRY revealed no mutations in the high-mobility-group domain (i.e., HMG box) in any of the four patients. Conventional and molecular cytogenetic analyses of metaphase chromosomes from each patient suggest that the smallest region of overlap (SRO) of deletions involves a very small region of distal band 9p24. Loss-of-heterozygosity studies using 17 highly polymorphic microsatellite markers, as well as FISH using YAC clones corresponding to the most distal markers on 9p, showed that the SRO lies distal to marker D9S1779. These results significantly narrow the putative sex-determining gene to the very terminal region of the short arm of chromosome 9.
9718360	"Well-bear and well-rear" in China?
9683585	Germ-line mutation analysis in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and related disorders. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant syndrome predisposing to tumors of the parathyroid, endocrine pancreas, anterior pituitary, adrenal glands, and diffuse neuroendocrine tissues. The MEN1 gene has been assigned, by linkage analysis and loss of heterozygosity, to chromosome 11q13 and recently has been identified by positional cloning. In this study, a total of 84 families and/or isolated patients with either MEN1 or MEN1-related inherited endocrine tumors were screened for MEN1 germ-line mutations, by heteroduplex and sequence analysis of the MEN1 gene-coding region and untranslated exon 1. Germ-line MEN1 alterations were identified in 47/54 (87%) MEN1 families, in 9/11 (82%) isolated MEN1 patients, and in only 6/19 (31.5%) atypical MEN1-related inherited cases. We characterized 52 distinct mutations in a total of 62 MEN1 germ-line alterations. Thirty-five of the 52 mutations were frameshifts and nonsense mutations predicted to encode for a truncated MEN1 protein. We identified eight missense mutations and five in-frame deletions over the entire coding sequence. Six mutations were observed more than once in familial MEN1. Haplotype analysis in families with identical mutations indicate that these occurrences reflected mainly independent mutational events. No MEN1 germ-line mutations were found in 7/54 (13%) MEN1 families, in 2/11 (18%) isolated MEN1 cases, in 13/19 (68. 5%) MEN1-related cases, and in a kindred with familial isolated hyperparathyroidism. Two hundred twenty gene carriers (167 affected and 53 unaffected) were identified. No evidence of genotype-phenotype correlation was found. Age-related penetrance was estimated to be >95% at age >30 years. Our results add to the diversity of MEN1 germ-line mutations and provide new tools in genetic screening of MEN1 and clinically related cases.
9837829	Evidence for a Turner syndrome locus or loci at Xp11.2-p22.1. Turner syndrome is the complex human phenotype associated with complete or partial monosomy X. Principle features of Turner syndrome include short stature, ovarian failure, and a variety of other anatomic and physiological abnormalities, such as webbed neck, lymphedema, cardiovascular and renal anomalies, hypertension, and autoimmune thyroid disease. We studied 28 apparently nonmosaic subjects with partial deletions of Xp, in order to map loci responsible for various components of the Turner syndrome phenotype. Subjects were carefully evaluated for the presence or absence of Turner syndrome features, and their deletions were mapped by FISH with a panel of Xp markers. Using a statistical method to examine genotype/phenotype correlations, we mapped one or more Turner syndrome traits to a critical region in Xp11.2-p22.1. These traits included short stature, ovarian failure, high-arched palate, and autoimmune thyroid disease. The results are useful for genetic counseling of individuals with partial monosomy X. Study of additional subjects should refine the localization of Turner syndrome loci and provide a rational basis for exploration of candidate genes.
9497249	Assignment of the tibial muscular dystrophy locus to chromosome 2q31. Tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD) is a rare autosomal dominant distal myopathy with late adult onset. The phenotype is relatively mild: muscle weakness manifests in the patient's early 40s and remains confined to the tibial anterior muscles. Histopathological changes in muscle are compatible with muscular dystrophy, with the exception that rimmed vacuoles are a rather common finding. We performed a genomewide scan, with 279 highly polymorphic Cooperative Human Linkage Center microsatellite markers, on 11 affected individuals of one Finnish TMD family. The only evidence for linkage emerged from markers in a 43-cM region on chromosome 2q. In further linkage analyses, which included three other Finnish TMD families and which used a denser set of markers, a maximum two-point LOD score of 10.14 (recombination fraction of .05) was obtained with marker D2S364. Multipoint likelihood calculations, combined with the haplotype and recombination analyses, restricted the TMD locus to an approximately 1-cM critical chromosomal region without any evidence of heterogeneity. Since all the affecteds share one core haplotype, the dominance of one ancestor mutation is obvious in the Finnish TMD families. The disease locus that was found represents a novel muscular dystrophy locus, providing evidence for the involvement of one additional gene in the distal myopathy group of muscle disorders.
9718357	NTBC and alkaptonuria.
9683604	From amplification to gene in thyroid cancer: a high-resolution mapped bacterial-artificial-chromosome resource for cancer chromosome aberrations guides gene discovery after comparative genome hybridization. Chromosome rearrangements associated with neoplasms provide a rich resource for definition of the pathways of tumorigenesis. The power of comparative genome hybridization (CGH) to identify novel genes depends on the existence of suitable markers, which are lacking throughout most of the genome. We now report a general approach that translates CGH data into higher-resolution genomic-clone data that are then used to define the genes located in aneuploid regions. We used CGH to study 33 thyroid-tumor DNAs and two tumor-cell-line DNAs. The results revealed amplifications of chromosome band 2p21, with less-intense amplification on 2p13, 19q13.1, and 1p36 and with least-intense amplification on 1p34, 1q42, 5q31, 5q33-34, 9q32-34, and 14q32. To define the 2p21 region amplified, a dense array of 373 FISH-mapped chromosome 2 bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) was constructed, and 87 of these were hybridized to a tumor-cell line. Four BACs carried genomic DNA that was amplified in these cells. The maximum amplified region was narrowed to 3-6 Mb by multicolor FISH with the flanking BACs, and the minimum amplicon size was defined by a contig of 420 kb. Sequence analysis of the amplified BAC 1D9 revealed a fragment of the gene, encoding protein kinase C epsilon (PKCepsilon), that was then shown to be amplified and rearranged in tumor cells. In summary, CGH combined with a dense mapped resource of BACs and large-scale sequencing has led directly to the definition of PKCepsilon as a previously unmapped candidate gene involved in thyroid tumorigenesis.
9463309	The haptoglobin-gene deletion responsible for anhaptoglobinemia. We have found an allelic deletion of the haptoglobin (Hp) gene from an individual with anhaptoglobinemia. The Hp gene cluster consists of coding regions of the alpha chain and beta chain of the haptoglobin gene (Hp) and of the alpha chain and beta chain of the haptoglobin-related gene (Hpr), in tandem from the 5' side. Southern blot and PCR analyses have indicated that the individual with anhaptoglobinemia was homozygous for the gene deletion and that the gene deletion was included at least from the promoter region of Hp to Hpr alpha but not to Hpr beta (Hpdel). In addition, we found seven individuals with hypohaptoglobinemia in three families, and the genotypes of six of the seven individuals were found to be Hp2/Hpdel. The phenotypes and genotypes in one of these three families showed the father to be hypohaptoglobinemic (Hp2) and Hp2/Hpdel, the mother to be Hp2-1 and Hp1/Hp2, one of the two children to be hypohaptoglobinemic (Hp2) and Hp2/Hpdel, and the other child to be Hp1 and Hp1/Hpdel, showing an anomalous inheritance of Hp phenotypes in the child with Hp1. The Hp2/Hpdel individuals had an extremely low level of Hp (mean+/-SD = 0.049+/-0. 043 mg/ml; n=6), compared with the level (1.64+/-1.07 mg/ml) obtained from 52 healthy volunteers having phenotype Hp2, whereas the serum Hp level of an individual with Hp1/Hpdel was 0.50 mg/ml, which was approximately half the level of Hp in control sera from the Hp1 phenotype (1.26+/-0.33 mg/ml; n=9), showing a gene-dosage effect. The other allele (Hp2) of individuals with Hp2/Hpdel was found to have, in all exons, no mutation, by DNA sequencing. On the basis of the present study, the mechanism of anhaptoglobinemia and the mechanism of anomalous inheritance of Hp phenotypes were well explained. However, the mechanism of hypohaptoglobinemia remains unknown.
9545410	A gene for familial juvenile polyposis maps to chromosome 18q21.1. Familial juvenile polyposis (FJP) is a hamartomatouspolyposis syndrome in which affected family members develop upper and lower gastrointestinal juvenile polyps and are at increased risk for gastrointestinal cancer. A genetic locus for FJP has not yet been identified by linkage; therefore, the objective of this study was to perform a focused genome screen in a large family segregating FJP. No evidence for linkage was found with markers near MSH2, MLH1, MCC, APC, HMPS, CDKN2A, JP1, PTEN, KRAS2, TP53, or LKB1. Linkage to FJP was established with several markers from chromosome 18q21.1. The maximum LOD score was 5.00, with marker D18S1099 (recombination fraction of .001). Analysis of critical recombinants places the FJP gene in an 11.9-cM interval bounded by D18S1118 and D18S487, a region that also contains the tumor-suppressor genes DCC and DPC4. These data demonstrate localization of a gene for FJP to chromosome 18q21.1 by linkage, and they raise the possibility that either DCC or DPC4 could be responsible for FJP.
9837820	A common and recurrent 13-bp deletion in the autoimmune regulator gene in British kindreds with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1 (APS1) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, autoimmune adrenocortical failure, and mucocutaneous candidiasis. Recently, an autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE-1), which is located on chromosome 21q22.3, has been identified, and mutations in European kindreds with APS1 have been described. We used SSCP analysis and direct DNA sequencing to screen the entire 1,635-bp coding region of AIRE-1 in 12 British families with APS1. A 13-bp deletion (964del13) was found to account for 17 of the 24 possible mutant AIRE-1 alleles, in our kindreds. This mutation was found to occur de novo in one affected subject. A common haplotype spanning the AIRE-1 locus was found in chromosomes that carried the 964del13 mutation, suggesting a founder effect in our population. One of 576 normal subjects was also a heterozygous carrier of the 964del13 mutation. Six other point mutations were found in AIRE-1, including two 1-bp deletions, three missense mutations (R15L, L28P, and Y90C), and a nonsense mutation (R257*). The high frequency of the 964del13 allele and the clustering of the other AIRE-1 mutations may allow rapid molecular screening for APS1 in British kindreds. Furthermore, the prevalence of the 964del13 AIRE-1 mutation may have implications in the pathogenesis of the more common autoimmune endocrinopathies in our population.
11577372	Alpha-B crystallin gene (CRYAB) mutation causes dominant congenital posterior polar cataract in humans. Congenital cataracts are an important cause of bilateral visual impairment in infants. In a four-generation family of English descent, we mapped dominant congenital posterior polar cataract to chromosome 11q22-q22.3. The maximum LOD score, 3.92 at recombination fraction 0, was obtained for marker D11S898, near the gene that encodes crystallin alpha-B protein (CRYAB). By sequencing the coding regions of CRYAB, we found in exon 3 a deletion mutation, 450delA, that is associated with cataract in this family. The mutation resulted in a frameshift in codon 150 and produced an aberrant protein consisting of 184 residues. This is the first report of a mutation, in this gene, resulting in isolated congenital cataract.
11112662	A narrow segment of maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7q31-qter in Silver-Russell syndrome delimits a candidate gene region. Maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (matUPD7), the inheritance of both chromosomes from only the mother, is observed in approximately 10% of patients with Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS). It has been suggested that at least one imprinted gene that regulates growth and development resides on human chromosome 7. To date, three imprinted genes-PEG1/MEST, gamma2-COP, and GRB10-have been identified on chromosome 7, but their role in the etiology of SRS remains uncertain. In a systematic screening with microsatellite markers, for matUPD7 cases among patients with SRS, we identified a patient who had a small segment of matUPD7 and biparental inheritance of the remainder of chromosome 7. Such a pattern may be explained by somatic recombination in the zygote. The matUPD7 segment at 7q31-qter extends for 35 Mb and includes the imprinted gene cluster of PEG1/MEST and gamma2-COP at 7q32. GRB10 at 7p11.2-p12 is located within a region of biparental inheritance. Although partial UPD has previously been reported for chromosomes 6, 11, 14, and 15, this is the first report of a patient with SRS who has segmental matUPD7. Our findings delimit a candidate imprinted region sufficient to cause SRS.
11359216	Mitochondria and the quality of human gametes.
11462173	p63 Gene mutations in eec syndrome, limb-mammary syndrome, and isolated split hand-split foot malformation suggest a genotype-phenotype correlation. p63 mutations have been associated with EEC syndrome (ectrodactyly, ectodermal dysplasia, and cleft lip/palate), as well as with nonsyndromic split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM). We performed p63 mutation analysis in a sample of 43 individuals and families affected with EEC syndrome, in 35 individuals affected with SHFM, and in three families with the EEC-like condition limb-mammary syndrome (LMS), which is characterized by ectrodactyly, cleft palate, and mammary-gland abnormalities. The results differed for these three conditions. p63 gene mutations were detected in almost all (40/43) individuals affected with EEC syndrome. Apart from a frameshift mutation in exon 13, all other EEC mutations were missense, predominantly involving codons 204, 227, 279, 280, and 304. In contrast, p63 mutations were detected in only a small proportion (4/35) of patients with isolated SHFM. p63 mutations in SHFM included three novel mutations: a missense mutation (K193E), a nonsense mutation (Q634X), and a mutation in the 3' splice site for exon 5. The fourth SHFM mutation (R280H) in this series was also found in a patient with classical EEC syndrome, suggesting partial overlap between the EEC and SHFM mutational spectra. The original family with LMS (van Bokhoven et al. 1999) had no detectable p63 mutation, although it clearly localizes to the p63 locus in 3q27. In two other small kindreds affected with LMS, frameshift mutations were detected in exons 13 and 14, respectively. The combined data show that p63 is the major gene for EEC syndrome, and that it makes a modest contribution to SHFM. There appears to be a genotype-phenotype correlation, in that there is a specific pattern of missense mutations in EEC syndrome that are not generally found in SHFM or LMS.
11156534	A novel syndrome affecting multiple mitochondrial functions, located by microcell-mediated transfer to chromosome 2p14-2p13. We have studied cultured skin fibroblasts from three siblings and one unrelated individual, all of whom had fatal mitochondrial disease manifesting soon after birth. After incubation with 1 mM glucose, these four cell strains exhibited lactate/pyruvate ratios that were six times greater than those of controls. On further analysis, enzymatic activities of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, NADH cytochrome c reductase, succinate dehydrogenase, and succinate cytochrome c reductase were severely deficient. In two of the siblings the enzymatic activity of cytochrome oxidase was mildly decreased (by approximately 50%). Metabolite analysis performed on urine samples taken from these patients revealed high levels of glycine, leucine, valine, and isoleucine, indicating abnormalities of both the glycine-cleavage system and branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase. In contrast, the activities of fibroblast pyruvate carboxylase, mitochondrial aconitase, and citrate synthase were normal. Immunoblot analysis of selected complex III subunits (core 1, cyt c(1), and iron-sulfur protein) and of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex subunits revealed no visible changes in the levels of all examined proteins, decreasing the possibility that an import and/or assembly factor is involved. To elucidate the underlying molecular defect, analysis of microcell-mediated chromosome-fusion was performed between the present study's fibroblasts (recipients) and a panel of A9 mouse:human hybrids (donors) developed by Cuthbert et al. (1995). Complementation was observed between the recipient cells from both families and the mouse:human hybrid clone carrying human chromosome 2. These results indicate that the underlying defect in our patients is under the control of a nuclear gene, the locus of which is on chromosome 2. A 5-cM interval has been identified as potentially containing the critical region for the unknown gene. This interval maps to region 2p14-2p13.
11353403	Evaluation of candidate genes in case-control studies: a statistical method to account for related subjects. Traditional case-control studies provide a powerful and efficient method for evaluation of association between candidate genes and disease. The sampling of cases from multiplex pedigrees, rather than from a catchment area, can increase the likelihood that genetic cases are selected. However, use of all the related cases without accounting for their biological relationship can increase the type I error rate of the statistical test. To overcome this problem, we present an analysis method that is used to compare genotype frequencies between cases and controls, according to a trend in proportions as the dosage of the risk allele increases. This method uses the appropriate variance to account for the correlated family data, thus maintaining the correct type I error rate. The magnitude of the association is estimated by the odds ratio, with the variance of the odds ratio also accounting for the correlated data. Our method makes efficient use of data collected from multiplex families and should prove useful for the analysis of candidate genes among families sampled for linkage studies. An application of our method, to family data from a prostate cancer study, is presented to illustrate the method's utility.
11083946	The 28-kb deletion spanning D15S63 is a polymorphic variant in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. D15S63 is one of the loci, on chromosome 15q11-q13, that exhibit parent-of-origin dependent methylation and that is commonly used in the diagnosis of Prader-Willi or Angelman syndromes (PWS/AS). A 28-kb deletion spanning the D15S63 locus was identified in five unrelated patients; in each of them the deletion was inherited from a normal parent. Three of the five families segregating the deletion were reported to be of Jewish Ashkenazi ancestry, and in the other two families the ancestral origin was unknown. To determine whether the 28-kb deletion is a benign variant, we screened for the deletion in 137 unselected Ashkenazi individuals and in 268 patients who were referred for molecular diagnosis of PWS/AS, of whom 89 were Ashkenazi and 47 were of mixed origin (Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi Jews). In the control group, three individuals were carriers of the deletion; among the patients, three were carriers, all of whom were Ashkenazi Jews. There was no significant difference between the control group and the Ashkenazi patients, indicating that the deletion is not a cause of PWS- and AS-like syndromes. The frequency of the 28-kb deletion in the Ashkenazi population was 1/75. Since methylation analysis at the D15S63 locus may lead to misdiagnosis, we suggest the use of SNRPN, either in a PCR-based assay or as a probe in Southern hybridization, as the method of choice in the diagnosis of PWS/AS.
11283796	Disruption of the bipartite imprinting center in a family with Angelman syndrome. Imprinting in 15q11-q13 is controlled by a bipartite imprinting center (IC), which maps to the SNURF-SNRPN locus. Deletions of the exon 1 region impair the establishment or maintenance of the paternal imprint and can cause Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). Deletions of a region 35 kb upstream of exon 1 impair maternal imprinting and can cause Angelman syndrome (AS). So far, in all affected sibs with an imprinting defect, an inherited IC deletion was identified. We report on two sibs with AS who do not have an IC deletion but instead have a 1-1.5 Mb inversion separating the two IC elements. The inversion is transmitted silently through the male germline but impairs maternal imprinting after transmission through the female germline. Our findings suggest that the close proximity and/or the correct orientation of the two IC elements are/is necessary for the establishment of a maternal imprint.
11333381	Niemann-Pick C1 disease: correlations between NPC1 mutations, levels of NPC1 protein, and phenotypes emphasize the functional significance of the putative sterol-sensing domain and of the cysteine-rich luminal loop. To obtain more information of the functional domains of the NPC1 protein, the mutational spectrum and the level of immunoreactive protein were investigated in skin fibroblasts from 30 unrelated patients with Niemann-Pick C1 disease. Nine of them were characterized by mild alterations of cellular cholesterol transport (the "variant" biochemical phenotype). The mutations showed a wide distribution to nearly all NPC1 domains, with a cluster (11/32) in a conserved NPC1 cysteine-rich luminal loop. Homozygous mutations in 14 patients and a phenotypically defined allele, combined with a new mutation, in a further 10 patients allowed genotype/phenotype correlations. Premature-termination-codon mutations, the three missense mutations in the sterol-sensing domain (SSD), and A1054T in the cysteine-rich luminal loop all occurred in patients with infantile neurological onset and "classic" (severe) cholesterol-trafficking alterations. By western blot, NPC1 protein was undetectable in the SSD missense mutations studied (L724P and Q775P) and essentially was absent in the A1054T missense allele. Our results thus enhance the functional significance of the SSD and demonstrate a correlation between the absence of NPC1 protein and the most severe neurological form. In the remaining missense mutations studied, corresponding to other disease presentations (including two adults with nonneurological disease), NPC1 protein was present in significant amounts of normal size, without clear-cut correlation with either the clinical phenotype or the "classic"/"variant" biochemical phenotype. Missense mutations in the cysteine-rich luminal loop resulted in a wide array of clinical and biochemical phenotypes. Remarkably, all five mutant alleles (I943M, V950M, G986S, G992R, and the recurrent P1007A) definitively correlated with the "variant" phenotype clustered within this loop, providing new insight on the functional complexity of the latter domain.
11443547	Mutations in the sepiapterin reductase gene cause a novel tetrahydrobiopterin-dependent monoamine-neurotransmitter deficiency without hyperphenylalaninemia. Classic tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) deficiencies are characterized by hyperphenylalaninemia and deficiency of monoamine neurotransmitters. In this article, we report two patients with progressive psychomotor retardation, dystonia, severe dopamine and serotonin deficiencies (low levels of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic and homovanillic acids), and abnormal pterin pattern (high levels of biopterin and dihydrobiopterin) in cerebrospinal fluid. Furthermore, they presented with normal urinary pterins and without hyperphenylalaninemia. Investigation of skin fibroblasts revealed inactive sepiapterin reductase (SR), the enzyme catalyzing the final two-step reaction in the biosynthesis of BH(4). Mutations in the SPR gene were detected in both patients and their family members. One patient was homozygous for a TC-->CT dinucleotide exchange, predicting a truncated SR (Q119X). The other patient was a compound heterozygote for a genomic 5-bp deletion (1397-1401delAGAAC) resulting in abolished SPR-gene expression and an A-->G transition leading to an R150G amino acid substitution and to inactive SR as confirmed by recombinant expression. The absence of hyperphenylalaninemia and the presence of normal urinary pterin metabolites and of normal SR-like activity in red blood cells may be explained by alternative pathways for the final two-step reaction of BH(4) biosynthesis in peripheral and neuronal tissues. We propose that, for the biosynthesis of BH(4) in peripheral tissues, SR activity may be substituted by aldose reductase (AR), carbonyl reductase (CR), and dihydrofolate reductase, whereas, in the brain, only AR and CR are fully present. Thus, autosomal recessive SR deficiency leads to BH(4) and to neurotransmitter deficiencies without hyperphenylalaninemia and may not be detected by neonatal screening for phenylketonuria.
11309687	A confidence-set approach for finding tightly linked genomic regions. As more studies adopt the approach of whole-genome screening, geneticists are faced with the challenge of having to interpret results from traditional approaches that were not designed for genome-scan data. Frequently, two-point analysis by the LOD method is performed to search for signals of linkage throughout the genome, for each of hundreds or even thousands of markers. This practice has raised the question of how to adjust the significance level for the fact that multiple tests are being performed. Various recommendations have been made, but no consensus has emerged. In this article, we propose a new method, the confidence-set approach, that circumvents the need to correct for the level of significance according to the number of markers tested. In the search for the gene location of a monogenic disorder, multiplicity adjustment is not needed in order to maintain the desired level of confidence. For complex diseases involving multiple genes, one needs only to adjust the level of significance according to the number of disease genes--a much smaller number than the number of markers in a genome screen-to ensure a predetermined genomewide confidence level. Furthermore, our formulation of the tests enables us to localize disease genes to small genomic regions, an extremely desirable feature that the traditional LOD method lacks. Our simulation study shows that, for sib-pair data, even when the coverage probability of the confidence set is chosen to be as high as 99%, our approach is able to implicate only the markers that are closely linked to the disease genes.
11410843	The presence of mitochondrial haplogroup x in Altaians from South Siberia.
11083947	Extent and distribution of linkage disequilibrium in three genomic regions. The positional cloning of genes underlying common complex diseases relies on the identification of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between genetic markers and disease. We have examined 127 polymorphisms in three genomic regions in a sample of 575 chromosomes from unrelated individuals of British ancestry. To establish phase, 800 individuals were genotyped in 160 families. The fine structure of LD was found to be highly irregular. Forty-five percent of the variation in disequilibrium measures could be explained by physical distance. Additional factors, such as allele frequency, type of polymorphism, and genomic location, explained <5% of the variation. Nevertheless, disequilibrium was occasionally detectable at 500 kb and was present for over one-half of marker pairs separated by <50 kb. Although these findings are encouraging for the prospects of a genomewide LD map, they suggest caution in interpreting localization due to allelic association.
11179004	Connexin mutations in skin disease and hearing loss.
11519010	Evidence of linkage with HLA-DR in DRB1*15-negative families with multiple sclerosis. The importance of the HLA-DR locus to multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility was assessed in 542 sib pairs with MS and in their families. By genotyping 1,978 individuals for HLA-DRB1 alleles, we confirmed the well-established association of MS with HLA-DRB1*15 (HLA-DRB1*1501 and HLA-DRB5*0101), by the transmission/disequilibrium test (chi2=138.3; P<.0001). We obtained significant evidence of linkage throughout the whole data set (mlod=4.09; 59.9% sharing). Surprisingly, similar sharing was also observed in 58 families in which both parents lacked the DRB1*15 allele (mlod=1.56; 62.7% sharing; P=.0081). Our findings suggest that the notion that HLA-DRB1*15 is the sole major-histocompatibility-complex determinant of susceptibility in northern-European populations with MS may be incorrect. It remains possible that the association of MS with HLA-DRB1*15 is due to linkage disequilibrium with a nearby locus and/or to the presence of disease-influencing allele(s) in DRB1*15-negative haplotypes.
11509994	Maple syrup urine disease: identification and carrier-frequency determination of a novel founder mutation in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder of branched-chain amino acid metabolism. We noted that a large proportion (10 of 34) of families with MSUD that were followed in our clinic were of Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) descent, leading us to search for a common mutation within this group. On the basis of genotyping data suggestive of a conserved haplotype at tightly linked markers on chromosome 6q14, the BCKDHB gene encoding the E1beta subunit was sequenced. Three novel mutations were identified in seven unrelated AJ patients with MSUD. The locations of the affected residues in the crystal structure of the E1beta subunit suggested possible mechanisms for the deleterious effects of these mutations. Large-scale population screening of AJ individuals for R183P, the mutation present in six of seven patients, revealed that the carrier frequency of the mutant allele was approximately 1/113; the patient not carrying R183P had a previously described homozygous mutation in the gene encoding the E2 subunit. These findings suggested that a limited number of mutations might underlie MSUD in the AJ population, potentially facilitating prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection of MSUD in this group.
11179018	A phase 1/2 clinical trial of enzyme replacement in fabry disease: pharmacokinetic, substrate clearance, and safety studies. Fabry disease results from deficient alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) activity and the pathologic accumulation of the globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) and related glycosphingolipids, primarily in vascular endothelial lysosomes. Treatment is currently palliative, and affected patients generally die in their 40s or 50s. Preclinical studies of recombinant human alpha-Gal A (r-halphaGalA) infusions in knockout mice demonstrated reduction of GL-3 in tissues and plasma, providing rationale for a phase 1/2 clinical trial. Here, we report a single-center, open-label, dose-ranging study of r-halphaGalA treatment in 15 patients, each of whom received five infusions at one of five dose regimens. Intravenously administered r-halphaGalA was cleared from the circulation in a dose-dependent manner, via both saturable and non-saturable pathways. Rapid and marked reductions in plasma and tissue GL-3 were observed biochemically, histologically, and/or ultrastructurally. Clearance of plasma GL-3 was dose-dependent. In patients with pre- and posttreatment biopsies, mean GL-3 content decreased 84% in liver (n=13), was markedly reduced in kidney in four of five patients, and after five doses was modestly lowered in the endomyocardium of four of seven patients. GL-3 deposits were cleared to near normal or were markedly reduced in the vascular endothelium of liver, skin, heart, and kidney, on the basis of light- and electron-microscopic evaluation. In addition, patients reported less pain, increased ability to sweat, and improved quality-of-life measures. Infusions were well tolerated; four patients experienced mild-to-moderate reactions, suggestive of hypersensitivity, that were managed conservatively. Of 15 patients, 8 (53%) developed IgG antibodies to r-halphaGalA; however, the antibodies were not neutralizing, as indicated by unchanged pharmacokinetic values for infusions 1 and 5. This study provides the basis for a phase 3 trial of enzyme-replacement therapy for Fabry disease.
11536080	Genomewide-linkage and haplotype-association studies map intracranial aneurysm to chromosome 7q11. Rupture of intracranial aneurysms (IAs) causes subarachnoid hemorrhage, a devastating condition with high morbidity and mortality. Angiographic and autopsy studies show that IA is a common disorder, with a prevalence of 3%-6%. Although IA has a substantial genetic component, little attention has been given to the genetic determinants. We report here a genomewide linkage study of IA in 104 Japanese affected sib pairs in which positive evidence of linkage on chromosomes 5q22-31 (maximum LOD score [MLS] 2.24), 7q11 (MLS 3.22), and 14q22 (MLS 2.31) were found. The best evidence of linkage is detected at D7S2472, in the vicinity of the elastin gene (ELN), a candidate gene for IA. Fourteen distinct single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified in ELN, and no obvious allelic association between IA and each SNP was observed. The haplotype between the intron-20/intron-23 polymorphism of ELN is strongly associated with IA (P=3.81x10-6), and homozygous patients are at high risk (P=.002), with an odds ratio of 4.39. These findings suggest that a genetic locus for IA lies within or close to the ELN locus on chromosome 7.
11254449	HPC2 variants and screen-detected prostate cancer. Two studies have reported significant associations between susceptibility to prostate cancer and two common missense variants of the HPC2/ELAC2 gene, with estimated relative risks in the range of two- to threefold. We investigated whether these polymorphisms could be informative in the prediction of the presence of prostate cancer in men undergoing prostatic biopsy for the evaluation of an elevated serum-PSA level (> or = 4.0 ng/ml). We genotyped 944 men who underwent a prostate biopsy at our institution, as well as a control population of 922 healthy, unselected women from the same population. The prevalence of the HPC2 Ala541Thr allele was similar in men with prostate cancer (6.3%), men with other prostatic conditions (6.8%), and healthy women (6.3%) (P = .83). We conclude that HPC2 genotyping is unlikely to be a useful adjunct to PSA in the prediction of the presence of biopsy-detected prostate cancer in asymptomatic men.
11309680	Identification of a new candidate locus for uric acid nephrolithiasis. Renal stone formation is a common multifactorial disorder, of unknown etiology, with an established genetic contribution. Lifetime risk for nephrolithiasis is approximately 10% in Western populations, and uric acid stones account for 5%-10% of all stones, depending on climatic, dietary, and ethnic differences. We studied a small, isolated founder population in Sardinia, characterized by an increased prevalence of uric acid stones, and performed a genomewide search in a deep-rooted pedigree comprising many members who formed uric acid renal stones. The pedigree was created by tracing common ancestors of affected individuals through a genealogical database based on archival records kept by the parish church since 1640. This genealogical information was used as the basis for the study strategy, involving screening for alleles shared among affected individuals, originating from common ancestors, and utilization of large pedigrees to obtain greater power for linkage detection. We performed multistep linkage and allele-sharing analyses. In the initial stage, 382 markers were typed in 14 closely related affected subjects; interesting regions were subsequently investigated in the whole sample. We identified two chromosomal regions that may harbor loci with susceptibility genes for uric acid stones. The strongest evidence was observed on 10q21-q22, where a LOD score of 3.07 was obtained for D10S1652 under an affected-only dominant model, and a LOD score of 3.90 was obtained using a dominant pseudomarker assignment. The localization was supported also by multipoint allele-sharing statistics and by haplotype analysis of familial cases and of unrelated affected subjects collected from the isolate. In the second region on 20q13.1-13.3, multipoint nonparametric scores yielded suggestive evidence in a approximately 20-cM region, and further analysis is needed to confirm and fine-map this putative locus. Replication studies are required to investigate the involvement of these regions in the genetic contribution to uric acid stone formation.
8352278	Statistical evaluation of multiple-locus linkage data in experimental species and its relevance to human studies: application to nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse and human insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). Common, familial human disorders generally do not follow Mendelian inheritance patterns, presumably because multiple loci are involved in disease susceptibility. One approach to mapping genes for such traits in humans is to first study an analogous form in an animal model, such as mouse, by using inbred strains and backcross experiments. Here we describe methodology for analyzing multiple-locus linkage data from such experimental backcrosses, particularly in light of multilocus genetic models, including the effects of epistasis. We illustrate these methods by using data from backcrosses involving nonobese diabetic mouse, which serves as an animal model for human insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. We show that it is likely that a minimum of nine loci contribute to susceptibility, with strong epistasis effects among these loci. Three of the loci actually confer a protective effect in the homozygote, compared with the heterozygote. Further, we discuss the relevance of these studies for analogous studies of the human form of the trait. Specifically, we show that the magnitude of the gene effect in the experimental backcross is likely to correlate only weakly, at best, with the expected magnitude of effect for a human form, because in humans the gene effect will depend more heavily on disease allele frequencies than on the observed penetrance ratios; such allele frequencies are unpredictable. Hence, the major benefit from animal studies may be a better understanding of the disease process itself, rather than identification of cells through comparison mapping in humans by using regions of homology.
8328463	American College of Medical Genetics. Prenatal interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) policy statement.
8434583	Germ-line origins of mutation in families with hemophilia B: the sex ratio varies with the type of mutation. Previous epidemiological and biochemical studies have generated conflicting estimates of the sex ratio of mutation. Direct genomic sequencing in combination with haplotype analysis extends previous analyses by allowing the precise mutation to be determined in a given family. From analysis of the factor IX gene of 260 consecutive families with hemophilia B, we report the germ-line origin of mutation in 25 families. When combined with 14 origins of mutation reported by others and with 4 origins previously reported by us, a total of 25 occur in the female germ line, and 18 occur in the male germ line. The excess of germ-line origins in females does not imply an overall excess mutation rate per base pair in the female germ line. Bayesian analysis of the data indicates that the sex ratio varies with the type of mutation. The aggregate of single-base substitutions shows a male predominance of germ-line mutations (P < .002). The maximum-likelihood estimate of the male predominance is 3.5-fold. Of the single-base substitutions, transitions at the dinucleotide CpG show the largest male predominance (11-fold). In contrast to single-base substitutions, deletions display a sex ratio of unity. Analysis of the parental age at transmission of a new mutation suggests that germ-line mutations are associated with a small increase in parental age in females but little, if any, increase in males. Although direct genomic sequencing offers a general method for defining the origin of mutation in specific families, accurate estimates of the sex ratios of different mutational classes require large sample sizes and careful correction for multiple biases of ascertainment. The biases in the present data result in an underestimate of the enhancement of mutation in males.
8434594	Educating the medical community through a teratology newsletter. To educate a geographically and professionally diverse group of health care providers about teratology in an economic and efficient manner, we developed a locally written and distributed teratology newsletter. Response to the newsletter, from readers as well as from our staff and funding agencies, suggests that such a newsletter can be a valuable tool in educating medical communities about teratology.
8352283	Better data analysis through data exploration.
8430703	The postulated X-inactivation center at Xq27 is most reasonably explained by ascertainment bias: heterozygous expression of recessive mutations is a powerful means of detecting unbalanced X inactivation.
8460646	BRCA1 maps proximal to D17S579 on chromosome 17q21 by genetic analysis. Previous studies have demonstrated linkage between early-onset breast cancer and ovarian cancer and genetic markers on chromosome 17q21. These markers define the location of a gene (BRCA1) which appears to be inherited as an autosomal dominant susceptibility allele. We analyzed five families with multiple affected individuals for evidence of linkage to the BRCA1 region. Two of the five families appear to be linked to BRCA1. One apparently linked family contains critical recombinants, suggesting that the gene is proximal to the marker D17S579 (Mfd188). These findings are consistent with the maximum-likelihood position estimated by the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium and with recombination events detected in other linked families. Linkage analysis was greatly aided by PCR-based analysis of paraffin-embedded normal breast tissue from deceased family members, demonstrating the feasibility and importance of this approach. One of the two families with evidence of linkage between breast cancer and genetic markers flanking BRCA1 represents the first such family of African-American descent to be reported in detail.
8102508	Genetic heterogeneity in benign familial neonatal convulsions: identification of a new locus on chromosome 8q. The syndrome of benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by unprovoked seizures in the first few weeks of life. One locus for BFNC has been mapped to chromosome 20 in several pedigrees, but we have excluded linkage to chromosome 20 in one large kindred. In order to identify this novel BFNC locus, dinucleotide repeat markers distributed throughout the genome were used to screen this family. Maximum pairwise LOD scores of 4.43 were obtained with markers D8S284 and D8S256 on chromosome 8q. Multipoint analysis placed the BFNC locus in the interval spanned by D8S198-D8S274. This study establishes the presence of a new BFNC locus and confirms genetic heterogeneity of this disorder.
8105686	High prevalence of the point mutation in exon 6 of the xeroderma pigmentosum group A-complementing (XPAC) gene in xeroderma pigmentosum group A patients in Tunisia. Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) patients in Tunisia who belong to the genetic complementation group A (XPA) have milder skin symptoms than do Japanese XPA patients. Such difference in the clinical features might be caused by the difference in the site of mutation in the XP A-complementing (XPAC) gene. The purpose of this study is to identify the genetic alterations in the XPAC gene in the Tunisian XPA patients and to investigate the relationship between the clinical symptoms and the genetic alterations. Three sites of mutation in the XPAC gene have been identified in the Japanese XPA patients, and about 85% of them have a G-->C point mutation at the splicing acceptor site of intron 3. We found that six (86%) of seven Tunisian XPA patients had a nonsense mutation in codon 228 in exon 6, because of a CGA-->TGA point mutation, which can be detected by the HphI RFLP. This type of mutation is the same as those found in two Japanese XPA patients with mild clinical symptoms. Milder skin symptoms in the XPA patients in Tunisia than in those in Japan, despite mostly sunny weather and the unsatisfactory sun protection in Tunisia, should be due to the difference in the mutation site.
8352275	Linkage analysis of idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) and marker loci on chromosome 6p in families of patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy: no evidence for an epilepsy locus in the HLA region. Evidence for a locus (EJM1) in the HLA region of chromosome 6p predisposing to idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) in the families of patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) has been obtained in two previous studies of separately ascertained groups of kindreds. Linkage analysis has been undertaken in a third set of 25 families including a patient with JME and at least one first-degree relative with IGE. Family members were typed for eight polymorphic loci on chromosome 6p: F13A, D6S89, D6S109, D6S105, D6S10, C4B, DQA1/A2, and TCTE1. Pairwise and multipoint linkage analysis was carried out assuming autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance and age-dependent high or low penetrance. No significant evidence in favor of linkage was obtained at any locus. Multipoint linkage analysis generated significant exclusion data (lod score < -2.0) at HLA and for a region 10-30 cM telomeric to HLA, the extent of which varied with the level of penetrance assumed. These observations indicate that genetic heterogeneity exists within this epilepsy phenotype.
8503437	X-linked mental retardation: in pursuit of a gene map.
8488836	Rapid prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal aneuploidies by fluorescence in situ hybridization: clinical experience with 4,500 specimens. Detection of chromosome aneuploidies in uncultured amniocytes is possible using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). We herein describe the results of the first clinical program which utilized FISH for the rapid detection of chromosome aneuploidies in uncultured amniocytes. FISH was performed on physician request, as an adjunct to cytogenetics in 4,500 patients. Region-specific DNA probes to chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, and Y were used to determine ploidy by analysis of signal number in hybridized nuclei. A sample was considered to be euploid when all autosomal probes generated two hybridization signals and when a normal sex chromosome pattern was observed in greater than or equal to 80% of hybridized nuclei. A sample was considered to be aneuploid when greater than or equal to 70% of hybridized nuclei displayed the same abnormal hybridization pattern for a specific probe. Of the attempted analyses, 90.2% met these criteria and were reported as informative to referring physicians within 2 d of receipt. Based on these reporting parameters, the overall detection rate for aneuploidies was 73.3% (107/146), with an accuracy of informative results for aneuploidies of 93.9% (107/114). Compared to cytogenetics, the accuracy of all informative FISH results, euploid and aneuploid, was 99.8%, and the specificity was 99.9%. In those pregnancies where fetal abnormalities had been observed by ultrasound, referring physicians requested FISH plus cytogenetics at a significantly higher rate than they requested cytogenetics alone. The current prenatal FISH protocol is not designed to detect all chromosome abnormalities and should only be utilized as an adjunctive test to cytogenetics. This experience demonstrates that FISH can provide a rapid and accurate clinical method for prenatal identification of chromosome aneuploidies.
8328452	Molecular analysis of Hurler syndrome in Druze and Muslim Arab patients in Israel: multiple allelic mutations of the IDUA gene in a small geographic area. The mutations underlying Hurler syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis IH) in Druze and Muslim Israeli Arab patients have been characterized. Four alleles were identified, using a combination of (a) PCR amplification of reverse-transcribed RNA or genomic DNA segments, (b) cycle sequencing of PCR products, and (c) restriction-enzyme analysis. One allele has two amino acid substitutions, Gly409-->Arg in exon 9 and Ter-->Cys in exon 14. The other three alleles have mutations in exon 2 (Tyr64-->Ter), exon 7 (Gln310-->Ter), or exon 8 (Thr366-->Pro). Transfection of mutagenized cDNAs into Cos-1 cells showed that two missense mutations, Thr366-->Pro and Ter-->Cys, permitted the expression of only trace amounts of alpha-L-iduronidase activity, whereas Gly409-->Arg permitted the expression of 60% as much enzyme as did the normal cDNA. The nonsense mutations were associated with abnormalities of RNA processing: (1) both a very low level of mRNA and skipping of exon 2 for Tyr64-->Ter and (2) utilization of a cryptic splice site for Gln310-->Ter. In all instances, the probands were found homozygous, and the parents heterozygous, for the mutant alleles, as anticipated from the consanguinity in each family. The two-mutation allele was identified in a family from Gaza; the other three alleles were found in seven families, five of them Druze, residing in a very small area of northern Israel. Since such clustering suggests a classic founder effect, the presence of three mutant alleles of the IDUA gene was unexpected.
8328456	Anticipation in bipolar affective disorder. Anticipation refers to the increase in disease severity or decrease in age at onset in succeeding generations. This phenomenon, formerly ascribed to observation biases, correlates with the expansion of trinucleotide repeat sequences (TNRs) in some disorders. If present in bipolar affective disorder (BPAD), anticipation could provide clues to its genetic etiology. We compared age at onset and disease severity between two generations of 34 unilineal families ascertained for a genetic linkage study of BPAD. Life-table analyses showed a significant decrease in survival to first mania or depression from the first to the second generation (P < .001). Intergenerational pairwise comparisons showed both a significantly earlier age at onset (P < .001) and a significantly increased disease severity (P < .001) in the second generation. This difference was significant under each of four data-sampling schemes which excluded probands in the second generation. The second generation experienced onset 8.9-13.5 years earlier and illness 1.8-3.4 times more severe than did the first generation. In additional analyses, drug abuse, deaths of affected individuals prior to interview, decreased fertility, censoring of age at onset, and the cohort effect did not affect our results. We conclude that genetic anticipation occurs in this sample of unilineal BPAD families. These findings may implicate genes with expanding TNRs in the genetic etiology of BPAD.
8434605	Identification of individuals by analysis of biallelic DNA markers, using PCR and solid-phase minisequencing. We have developed a new method for forensic identification of individuals, in which a panel of biallelic DNA markers are amplified by the PCR, and the variable nucleotides are detected in the amplified DNA fragments by the solid-phase minisequencing method. A panel of 12 common polymorphic nucleotides located on different chromosomes with reported allele frequencies close to .5 were chosen for the test. The allele frequencies for most of the markers were found to be similar in the Finnish and other Caucasian populations. We also introduce a novel approach for rapid determination of the population frequencies of biallelic markers. By this approach we were able to determine the allele frequencies of the markers in the Finnish population, by quantitative analysis of three pooled DNA samples representing 3,000 individuals. The power of discrimination and exclusion of the solid-phase minisequencing typing test with 12 markers was similar to that of three VNTR markers that are routinely used in forensic analyses at our institute. The solid-phase minisequencing method was successfully applied to type paternity and forensic case samples. We also show that the quantitative nature of our method allows typing of mixed samples.
8488834	Insurance commissioners and genetic discrimination.
7902670	Homozygotes for the autosomal dominant neoplasia syndrome (MEN1). Families in which both parents are heterozygotes for the same autosomal dominant neoplasia syndrome are extremely unusual. Recently, we had the unique opportunity to evaluate three symptomatic siblings from the union between two unrelated individuals affected by multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). When the three siblings and their parents and relatives were genotyped for 12 markers tightly linked to the MEN1 locus, at 11q13, two of the siblings were found to be homozygotes, and one a heterozygote, for MEN1. With regard to the MEN1 syndrome, no phenotypic differences were observed between the two homozygotes and the heterozygotes. However, the two homozygotes showed unexplained infertility, which was not the case for any of the heterozygotes. Thus, MEN1 appears to be a disease with complete dominance, and the presence of two MEN1 alleles with mutations of the type that occur constitutionally may be insufficient for tumor development.
8387722	A base substitution in the promoter associated with the human haptoglobin 2-1 modified phenotype decreases transcriptional activity and responsiveness to interleukin-6 in human hepatoma cells. An A-to-C base substitution at nucleotide position -61 in the promoter region of the human haptoglobin gene (Hp) has been shown to be strongly associated with the haptoglobin 2-1 modified (Hp2-1mod) phenotype. In order to investigate whether this base substitution is the cause of reduced expression of the Hp2 allele relative to the Hp1 allele in individuals with the Hp2-1mod phenotype, we used the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) expression system to evaluate promoter function. In HepG2 cells, which normally express their endogenous haptoglobin genes, CAT plasmid constructs with the -61C base change in the promoter had about 10-fold-lower transcriptional activity after transfection than did the Hp control construct. The -61C substitution also rendered the construct unresponsive to treatment by interleukin-6 after transfection into Hep3B2 cells, which normally do not express haptoglobin but do so in response to stimulation by acute-phase reactants. In addition, two base substitutions, T to A and A to G, at positions -104 and -55G, respectively, in the promoter region of the Hp1 allele, are also associated with the Hp2-1mod phenotype. CAT constructs with both substitutions (-104A-55G) and with one substitution (-55G) showed activity similar to that in the Hp control when transfected into both HepG2 and Hep3B2 cells, although interleukin-6 induction was less than with the Hp control construct. These results further support the hypothesis that the Hp2-1mod phenotype results, in part, from the -61C mutation in the promoter region of the Hp2 gene.
8328462	beta-Hexosaminidase isozymes from cells cotransfected with alpha and beta cDNA constructs: analysis of the alpha-subunit missense mutation associated with the adult form of Tay-Sachs disease. In vitro mutagenesis and transient expression in COS cells has been used to associate a missense mutation with a clinical or biochemical phenotype. Mutations affecting the alpha-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase A (alpha beta) (E.C.3.2.1.52) result in Tay-Sachs disease. Because hexosaminidase A is heterodimeric, analysis of alpha-chain mutations is not straightforward. We examine three approaches utilizing previously identified mutations affecting alpha-chain folding. These involve transfection of (1) the alpha cDNA alone; (2) a beta cDNA construct encoding a beta-subunit substituted at a position homologous to that of the alpha-subunit, and (3) both alpha and beta cDNAs. The latter two procedures amplified residual activity levels over that of patient samples, an effect not previously found with mutations affecting an "active" alpha Arg residue. This effect may help to discriminate between protein-folding and active-site mutations. We conclude that, with proper controls, the latter method of cotransfection can be used to evaluate the effects and perhaps to predict the clinical course of some alpha-chain mutations. Using this technique, we demonstrate that the adult-onset Tay-Sachs mutation, alpha Gly --> Ser269, does not directly affect alpha beta dimerization but exerts an indirect effect on the dimer through destabilizing the folded alpha-subunit at physiological temperatures. Two other alpha mutations linked to more severe phenotypes appear to inhibit the initial folding of the subunit.
8503442	The haplotype-relative-risk (HRR) method for analysis of association in nuclear families. One major problem in studying an association between a marker locus and a disease is the selection of an appropriate group of controls. However, this problem of population stratification can be circumvented in a quite elegant manner by family-based methods. The haplotype-relative-risk (HRR) method, which samples nuclear families with a single affected child and uses the parental haplotypes not transmitted to that child as a control individual, represents such a method for estimating the relative risk of a marker phenotype. In the special case of a recessive disease, it was already known that the equivalence of the HRR method with the classical relative risk (RR) obtained from independent samples holds only if the probability theta of a recombination between marker and disease locus is zero. We extend this result to an arbitrary mode of inheritance. Furthermore, we compare the distribution of the estimators for HRR and RR and show that, in the case of a positive linkage disequilibrium between a marker and disease allele, the distribution of the estimator for HRR is (stochastically) smaller than that for RR, irrespective of the recombination fraction. The practical implication of this result is that, for the HRR method, there is no tendency to give unduly high risk estimators, even for theta > 0. Finally, we give an expression for the standard error of the estimator for HRR by taking into account the nonindependence of transmitted and nontransmitted parental marker alleles in the case of theta > 0.
9042931	Detecting disease-predisposing variants: the haplotype method. For many HLA-associated diseases, multiple alleles-- and, in some cases, multiple loci--have been suggested as the causative agents. The haplotype method for identifying disease-predisposing amino acids in a genetic region is a stratification analysis. We show that, for each haplotype combination containing all the amino acid sites involved in the disease process, the relative frequencies of amino acid variants at sites not involved in disease but in linkage disequilibrium with the disease-predisposing sites are expected to be the same in patients and controls. The haplotype method is robust to mode of inheritance and penetrance of the disease and can be used to determine unequivocally whether all amino acid sites involved in the disease have not been identified. Using a resampling technique, we developed a statistical test that takes account of the nonindependence of the sites sampled. Further, when multiple sites in the genetic region are involved in disease, the test statistic gives a closer fit to the null expectation when some--compared with none--of the true predisposing factors are included in the haplotype analysis. Although the haplotype method cannot distinguish between very highly correlated sites in one population, ethnic comparisons may help identify the true predisposing factors. The haplotype method was applied to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) HLA class II DQA1-DQB1 data from Caucasian, African, and Japanese populations. Our results indicate that the combination DQA1#52 (Arg predisposing) DQB1#57 (Asp protective), which has been proposed as an important IDDM agent, does not include all the predisposing elements. With rheumatoid arthritis HLA class II DRB1 data, the results were consistent with the shared-epitope hypothesis.
8981970	Expression of DAZ, an azoospermia factor candidate, in human spermatogonia.
9245996	The seventh form of autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is mapped to 17q11-12. The group of autosomal recessive (AR) muscular dystrophies includes, among others, two main clinical entities, the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) and the distal muscular dystrophies. The former are characterized mainly by muscle wasting of the upper and lower limbs, with a wide range of clinical severity. This clinical heterogeneity has been demonstrated at the molecular level, since the genes for six AR forms have been cloned and/or have been mapped to 15q15.1 (LGMD2A), 2p12-16 (LGMD2B), 13q12 (LGMD2C), 17q12-q21.33 (LGMD2D),4q12 (LGMD2E), and 5q33-34 (LGMD2F). The AR distal muscular dystrophies originally included two subgroups, Miyoshi myopathy, characterized mainly by extremely elevated serum creatine kinase (CK) activity and by a dystrophic muscle pattern, and Nonaka myopathy, which is distinct from the others because of the normal to slightly elevated serum CK levels and a myopathic muscle pattern with rimmed vacuoles. With regard to our unclassified AR LGMD families, analysis of the affected sibs from one of them (family LG61) revealed some clinical and laboratory findings (early involvement of the distal muscles, mildly elevated serum CK levels, and rimmed vacuoles in muscle biopsies) that usually are not observed in the analysis of patients with LGMD2A-LGMD2F. In the present investigation, through a genomewide search in family LG61, we demonstrated linkage of the allele causing this form of muscular dystrophy to a 3-cM region on 17q11-12. We suggest that this form, which, interestingly, clinically resembles AR Kugelberg-Welander disease, should be classified as LGMD2G. In addition, our results indicate the existence of still another locus causing severe LGMD.
9311748	Accurate inference of relationships in sib-pair linkage studies. Relative-pair designs are routinely employed in linkage studies of complex genetic diseases and quantitative traits. Valid application of these methods requires correct specification of the relationships of the pairs. For example, within a sibship, presumed full sibs actually might be MZ twins, half sibs, or unrelated. Misclassification of half-sib pairs or unrelated individuals as full sibs can result in reduced power to detect linkage. When other family members, such as parents or additional siblings, are available, incorrectly specified relationships usually will be detected through apparent incompatibilities with Mendelian inheritance. Without other family members, sibling relationships cannot be determined absolutely, but they still can be inferred probabilistically if sufficient genetic marker data are available. In this paper, we describe a simple likelihood ratio method to infer the true relationship of a putative sibling pair. We explore the number of markers required to accurately infer relationships typically encountered in a sib-pair study, as a function of marker allele frequencies, marker spacing, and genotyping error rate, and we conclude that very accurate inference of relationships can be achieved, given the marker data from even part of a genome scan. We compare our method to related methods of relationship inference that have been suggested. Finally, we demonstrate the value of excluding non-full sibs in a genetic linkage study of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
9399915	Centromere DNA dynamics: latent centromeres and neocentromere formation.
8981950	Hereditary multiple exostoses (EXT): mutational studies of familial EXT1 cases and EXT-associated malignancies. Hereditary multiple exostoses (EXT) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the formation of cartilage-capped prominences that develop from the growth centers of the long bones. EXT is genetically heterogeneous, with three loci, currently identified on chromosomes 8q24.1, 11p13, and 19q. The EXT1 gene, located on chromosome 8q24.1, has been cloned and is encoded by a 3.4-kb cDNA. Five mutations in the EXT1 gene have been identified--four germ-line mutations, including two unrelated families with the same mutation, and one somatic mutation in a patient with chondrosarcoma. Four of the mutations identified resulted in frameshifts and premature termination codons, while the fifth mutation resulted in a substitution of leucine for arginine. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis of chondrosarcomas and chondroblastomas revealed multiple LOH events at loci on chromosomes 3q, 8q, 10q, and 19q. One sporadic chondrosarcoma demonstrated LOH for EXT1 and EXT3, while a second underwent LOH for EXT2 and chromosome 10. A third chondrosarcoma underwent LOH for EXT1 and chromosome 3q. These results agree with previous findings that mutations at EXT1 and multiple genetic events that include LOH at other loci may be required for the development of chondrosarcoma.
9199562	Identification of proximal spinal muscular atrophy carriers and patients by analysis of SMNT and SMNC gene copy number. The survival motor neuron (SMN) transcript is encoded by two genes, SMNT and SMNC. The autosomal recessive proximal spinal muscular atrophy that maps to 5q12 is caused by mutations in the SMNT gene. The SMNT gene can be distinguished from the SMNC gene by base-pair changes in exons 7 and 8. SMNT exon 7 is not detected in approximately 95% of SMA cases due to either deletion or sequence-conversion events. Small mutations in SMNT now have been identified in some of the remaining nondeletion patients. However, there is no reliable quantitative assay for SMNT, to distinguish SMA compound heterozygotes from non-5q SMA-like cases (phenocopies) and to accurately determine carrier status. We have developed a quantitative PCR assay for the determination of SMNT and SMNC gene-copy number. This report demonstrates how risk estimates for the diagnosis and detection of SMA carriers can be modified by the accurate determination of SMNT copy number.
9042937	HLA sharing and history of miscarriage among women with rheumatoid arthritis.
9399882	Inherited interstitial duplications of proximal 15q: genotype-phenotype correlations. We present the cytogenetic, molecular cytogenetic, and molecular genetic results on 20 unrelated patients with an interstitial duplication of the proximal long arm of chromosome 15. Multiple probes showed that the Prader-Willi/Angelman critical region (PWACR) was included in the duplication in 4/20 patients, each ascertained with developmental delay. The duplication was also found in two affected but not in three unaffected sibs of one of these patients. All four probands had inherited their duplication from their mothers, three of whom were also affected. Two of the affected mothers also carried a maternally inherited duplication, whereas the duplication in the unaffected mother and in an unaffected grandmother was paternal in origin, raising the possibility of a parental-origin effect. The PWACR was not duplicated in the remaining 16 patients, of whom 4 were referred with developmental delay. In the 14 families for which parental samples were available, the duplication was inherited with equal frequency from a phenotypically normal parent, mother or father. Comparative genomic hybridization undertaken on two patients suggested that proximal 15q outside the PWACR was the origin of the duplicated material. The use of PWACR probes discriminates between a large group of duplications of no apparent clinical significance and a smaller group, in which a maternally derived PWACR duplication is consistently associated with developmental delay and speech difficulties but not with overt features of either Prader-Willi syndrome or Angelman syndrome.
9326327	Molecular definition of 22q11 deletions in 151 velo-cardio-facial syndrome patients. Velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS) is a relatively common developmental disorder characterized by craniofacial anomalies and conotruncal heart defects. Many VCFS patients have hemizygous deletions for a part of 22q11, suggesting that haploinsufficiency in this region is responsible for its etiology. Because most cases of VCFS are sporadic, portions of 22q11 may be prone to rearrangement. To understand the molecular basis for chromosomal deletions, we defined the extent of the deletion, by genotyping 151 VCFS patients and performing haplotype analysis on 105, using 15 consecutive polymorphic markers in 22q11. We found that 83% had a deletion and >90% of these had a similar approximately 3 Mb deletion, suggesting that sequences flanking the common breakpoints are susceptible to rearrangement. We found no correlation between the presence or size of the deletion and the phenotype. To further define the chromosomal breakpoints among the VCFS patients, we developed somatic hybrid cell lines from a set of VCFS patients. An 11-kb resolution physical map of a 1,080-kb region that includes deletion breakpoints was constructed, incorporating genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs) isolated by the hybridization selection method. The ordered markers were used to examine the two separated copies of chromosome 22 in the somatic hybrid cell lines. In some cases, we were able to map the chromosome breakpoints within a single cosmid. A 480-kb critical region for VCFS has been delineated, including the genes for GSCL, CTP, CLTD, HIRA, and TMVCF, as well as a number of novel ordered ESTs.
9042906	Congenital anomalies and childhood cancer in Great Britain. The presence of cancer and a congenital anomaly in the same child may be explained in certain cases by an underlying genetic abnormality. The study of these associations may lead to the identification of genes that are important in both processes. We have examined the records of 20,304 children with cancer in Britain, who were entered into the National Registry of Childhood Tumors (NRCT) during 1971-86, for the presence of congenital anomalies. The frequency of anomalies was much higher among children with solid tumors (4.4%) than among those with leukemia or lymphoma (2.6%; P < .0001). The types of cancer with the highest rates of anomalies were Wilms tumor (8.1%), Ewing sarcoma (5.8%), hepatoblastoma (6.4%), and gonadal and germ-cell tumors (6.4%). Cases of spina bifida and abnormalities of the eye, ribs, and spine were more common in children with cancer than among population-based controls. Future studies may be directed toward identifying the developmental pathways and the relevant genes that are involved in the overlap between pediatric cancer and malformation.
11644969	Ethical guidelines for enzyme therapy in neuronopathic Gaucher disease.
9326328	Identification of a locus for progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis PFIC2 on chromosome 2q24. Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC; OMIM 211600) is the second most common familial cholestatic syndrome presenting in infancy. A locus has previously been mapped to chromosome 18q21-22 in the original Byler pedigree. This chromosomal region also harbors the locus for benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (BRIC) a related phenotype. Linkage analysis in six consanguineous PFIC pedigrees from the Middle East has previously excluded linkage to chromosome 18q21-22, indicating the existence of locus heterogeneity within the PFIC phenotype. By use of homozygosity mapping and a genome scan in these pedigrees, a locus designated "PFIC2" has been mapped to chromosome 2q24. A maximum LOD score of 8.5 was obtained in the interval between marker loci D2S306 and D2S124, with all families linked.
8981969	Prevalence and parental origin of de novo RET mutations in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. Le Groupe d'Etude des Tumeurs a Calcitonine.
9150164	A gene for autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNA12) maps to chromosome 11q22-24. We performed linkage analysis in a Belgian family with autosomal dominant midfrequency hearing loss, which has a prelingual onset and a nonprogressive course in most patients. We found LOD scores >6 with markers on chromosome 11q. Analysis of key recombinants maps this deafness gene (DFNA12) to a 36-cM interval on chromosome 11q22-24, between markers D11S4120 and D11S912. The critical regions for the recessive deafness locus DFNB2 and the dominant locus DFNA11, which were previously localized to the long arm of chromosome 11, do not overlap with the candidate interval of DFNA12.
9326322	Analysis of the RPGR gene in 11 pedigrees with the retinitis pigmentosa type 3 genotype: paucity of mutations in the coding region but splice defects in two families. X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP) is a severe form of inherited progressive retinal degeneration. The RP3 (retinitis pigmentosa type 3) locus at Xp21.1 is believed to account for the disease in the majority of XLRP families. Linkage analysis and identification of patients with chromosomal deletion have refined the location of the RP3 locus and recently have led to the cloning of the RPGR (retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator) gene, which has been shown to be mutated in 10%-15% of XLRP patients. In order to systematically characterize the RPGR mutations, we identified 11 retinitis pigmentosa type III (RP3) families by haplotype analysis. Sequence analysis of the PCR-amplified genomic DNA from patients representing these RP3 families did not reveal any causative mutation in RPGR exons 2-19, spanning >98% of the coding region. In patients from two families, we identified transition mutations in the intron region near splice sites (IVS10+3 and IVS13-8). RNA analysis showed that both splice-site mutations resulted in the generation of aberrant RPGR transcripts. Our results support the hypothesis that mutations in the reported RPGR gene are not a common defect in the RP3 subtype of XLRP and that a majority of causative mutations may reside either in as yet unidentified RPGR exons or in another nearby gene at Xp21.1.
9199548	Genetics of narcolepsy and other sleep disorders.
9012405	A mutation in the XPB/ERCC3 DNA repair transcription gene, associated with trichothiodystrophy. Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder characterized by sulfur-deficient brittle hair and nails, mental retardation, impaired sexual development, and ichthyosis. Photosensitivity has been reported in approximately 50% of the cases, but no skin cancer is associated with TTD. Virtually all photosensitive TTD patients have a deficiency in the nucleotide excision repair (NER) of UV-induced DNA damage that is indistinguishable from that of xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) complementation group D (XP-D) patients. DNA repair defects in XP-D are associated with two additional, quite different diseases; XP, a sun-sensitive and cancer-prone repair disorder, and Cockayne syndrome (CS), a photosensitive condition characterized by physical and mental retardation and wizened facial appearance. One photosensitive TTD case constitutes a new repair-deficient complementation group, TTD-A. Remarkably, both TTD-A and XP-D defects are associated with subunits of TFIIH, a basal transcription factor with a second function in DNA repair. Thus, mutations in TFIIH components may, on top of a repair defect, also cause transcriptional insufficiency, which may explain part of the non-XP clinical features of TTD. Besides XPD and TTDA, the XPB gene product is also part of TFIIH. To date, three patients with the remarkable conjunction of XP and CS but not TTD have been assigned to XP complementation group B (XP-B). Here we present the characterization of the NER defect in two mild TTD patients (TTD6VI and TTD4VI) and confirm the assignment to X-PB. The causative mutation was found to be a single base substitution resulting in a missense mutation (T119P) in a region of the XPB protein completely conserved in yeast, Drosophila, mouse, and man. These findings define a third TTD complementation group, extend the clinical heterogeneity associated with XP-B, stress the exclusive relationship between TTD and mutations in subunits of repair/transcription factor TFIIH, and strongly support the concept of "transcription syndromes."
9382097	Neonatal, lethal noncompaction of the left ventricular myocardium is allelic with Barth syndrome. Loss-of-function mutations in the G4.5 gene have been shown to cause Barth syndrome (BTHS), an X-linked disorder characterized by cardiac and skeletal myopathy, short stature, and neutropenia. We recently reported a family with a severe X-linked cardiomyopathy described as isolated noncompaction of the left ventricular myocardium (INVM). Other findings associated with BTHS (skeletal myopathy, neutropenia, growth retardation, elevated urinary organic acids, and mitochondrial abnormalities) were either absent or inconsistent. A linkage study of the X chromosome localized INVM to the Xq28 region near the BTHS locus, suggesting that these disorders are allelic. We screened the G4.5 gene for mutations in this family with SSCP and direct sequencing and found a novel glycine-to-arginine substitution at position 197. This position is conserved in a homologous Caenorhabditis elegans protein. We conclude that INVM is a severe allelic variant of BTHS with a specific effect on the heart. This finding provides further structure-function information about the G4.5 gene product and has implications for unexplained cases of severe infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in males.
9382104	A novel locus for autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss, DFNA13, maps to chromosome 6p. Nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL) is the most common type of hearing impairment in the elderly. Environmental and hereditary factors play an etiologic role, although the relative contribution of each is unknown. To date, 39 NSHL genes have been localized. Twelve produce autosomal dominant hearing loss, most frequently postlingual in onset and progressive in nature. We have ascertained a large, multigenerational family in which a gene for autosomal dominant NSHL is segregating. Affected individuals experience progressive hearing loss beginning in the 2d-4th decades, eventually making the use of amplification mandatory. A novel locus, DFNA13, was identified on chromosome 6p; the disease gene maps to a 4-cM interval flanked by D6S1663 and D6S1691, with a maximum two-point LOD score of 6.409 at D6S299.
19375058	A nonsense mutation in COQ9 causes autosomal-recessive neonatal-onset primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency: a potentially treatable form of mitochondrial disease. Coenzyme Q(10) is a mobile lipophilic electron carrier located in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Defects of coenzyme Q(10) biosynthesis represent one of the few treatable mitochondrial diseases. We genotyped a patient with primary coenzyme Q(10) deficiency who presented with neonatal lactic acidosis and later developed multisytem disease including intractable seizures, global developmental delay, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and renal tubular dysfunction. Cultured skin fibroblasts from the patient had a coenzyme Q(10) biosynthetic rate of 11% of normal controls and accumulated an abnormal metabolite that we believe to be a biosynthetic intermediate. In view of the rarity of coenzyme Q(10) deficiency, we hypothesized that the disease-causing gene might lie in a region of ancestral homozygosity by descent. Data from an Illumina HumanHap550 array were analyzed with BeadStudio software. Sixteen regions of homozygosity >1.5 Mb were identified in the affected infant. Two of these regions included the loci of two of 16 candidate genes implicated in human coenzyme Q(10) biosynthesis. Sequence analysis demonstrated a homozygous stop mutation affecting a highly conserved residue of COQ9, leading to the truncation of 75 amino acids. Site-directed mutagenesis targeting the equivalent residue in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae abolished respiratory growth.
19576565	Deficiency of Dol-P-Man synthase subunit DPM3 bridges the congenital disorders of glycosylation with the dystroglycanopathies. Alpha-dystroglycanopathies such as Walker Warburg syndrome represent an important subgroup of the muscular dystrophies that have been related to defective O-mannosylation of alpha-dystroglycan. In many patients, the underlying genetic etiology remains unsolved. Isolated muscular dystrophy has not been described in the congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) caused by N-linked protein glycosylation defects. Here, we present a genetic N-glycosylation disorder with muscular dystrophy in the group of CDG type I. Extensive biochemical investigations revealed a strongly reduced dolichol-phosphate-mannose (Dol-P-Man) synthase activity. Sequencing of the three DPM subunits and complementation of DPM3-deficient CHO2.38 cells showed a pathogenic p.L85S missense mutation in the strongly conserved coiled-coil domain of DPM3 that tethers catalytic DPM1 to the ER membrane. Cotransfection experiments in CHO cells showed a reduced binding capacity of DPM3(L85S) for DPM1. Investigation of the four Dol-P-Man-dependent glycosylation pathways in the ER revealed strongly reduced O-mannosylation of alpha-dystroglycan in a muscle biopsy, thereby explaining the clinical phenotype of muscular dystrophy. This mild Dol-P-Man biosynthesis defect due to DPM3 mutations is a cause for alpha-dystroglycanopathy, thereby bridging the congenital disorders of glycosylation with the dystroglycanopathies.
19836009	Homozygous mutations in ADAMTS10 and ADAMTS17 cause lenticular myopia, ectopia lentis, glaucoma, spherophakia, and short stature. Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS) is a well-characterized disorder in which patients develop eye and skeletal abnormalities. Autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant forms of WMS are caused by mutations in ADAMTS10 and FBN1 genes, respectively. Here we report on 13 patients from seven unrelated families from the Arabian Peninsula. These patients have a constellation of features that fall within the WMS spectrum and follow an autosomal-recessive mode of inheritance. Individuals who came from two families and met the diagnostic criteria for WMS were each found to have a different homozygous missense mutation in ADAMTS10. Linkage analysis and direct sequencing of candidate genes in another two families and a sporadic case with phenotypes best described as WMS-like led to the identification of three homozygous mutations in the closely related ADAMTS17 gene. Our clinical and genetic findings suggest that ADAMTS17 plays a role in crystalline lens zonules and connective tissue formation and that mutations in ADAMTS17 are sufficient to produce some of the main features typically described in WMS.
19084217	Variants in TF and HFE explain approximately 40% of genetic variation in serum-transferrin levels. Only a small proportion of genetic variation in complex traits has been explained by SNPs from genome-wide association studies (GWASs). We report the results from two GWASs for serum markers of iron status (serum iron, serum transferrin, transferrin saturation with iron, and serum ferritin), which are important in iron overload (e.g., hemochromatosis) and deficiency (e.g., anemia) conditions. We performed two GWASs on samples of Australians of European descent. In the first GWAS, 411 adolescent twins and their siblings were genotyped with 100K SNPs. rs1830084, 10.8 kb 3' of TF, was significantly associated with serum transferrin (p total association test = 1.0 x 10(-9); p within-family test = 2.2 x 10(-5)). In the second GWAS on an independent sample of 459 female monozygotic (MZ) twin pairs genotyped with 300K SNPs, we found rs3811647 (within intron 11 of TF, HapMap CEU r(2) with rs1830084 = 0.86) was significantly associated with serum transferrin (p = 3.0 x 10(-15)). In the second GWAS, we found two additional and independent SNPs on TF (rs1799852 and rs2280673) and confirmed the known C282Y mutation in HFE to be independently associated with serum transferrin. The three variants in TF (rs3811647, rs1799852 and rs2280673) plus the HFE C282Y mutation explained approximately 40% of genetic variation in serum transferrin (p = 7.8 x 10(-25)). These findings are potentially important for our understanding of iron metabolism and of regulation of hepatic protein secretion, and also strongly support the hypothesis that the genetic architecture of some endophenotypes may be simpler than that of disease.
19944400	Deletions and point mutations of LRRC50 cause primary ciliary dyskinesia due to dynein arm defects. Genetic defects affecting motility of cilia and flagella cause chronic destructive airway disease, randomization of left-right body asymmetry, and, frequently, male infertility in primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). The most frequent defects involve outer and inner dynein arms (ODAs and IDAs) that are large multiprotein complexes responsible for cilia-beat generation and regulation, respectively. Here, we demonstrate that large genomic deletions, as well as point mutations involving LRRC50, are responsible for a distinct PCD variant that is characterized by a combined defect involving assembly of the ODAs and IDAs. Functional analyses showed that LRRC50 deficiency disrupts assembly of distally and proximally DNAH5- and DNAI2-containing ODA complexes, as well as DNALI1-containing IDA complexes, resulting in immotile cilia. On the basis of these findings, we assume that LRRC50 plays a role in assembly of distinct dynein-arm complexes.
19853236	Sequence variants in three loci influence monocyte counts and erythrocyte volume. Blood cells participate in vital physiological processes, and their numbers are tightly regulated so that homeostasis is maintained. Disruption of key regulatory mechanisms underlies many blood-related Mendelian diseases but also contributes to more common disorders, including atherosclerosis. We searched for quantitative trait loci (QTL) for hematology traits through a whole-genome association study, because these could provide new insights into both hemopoeitic and disease mechanisms. We tested 1.8 million variants for association with 13 hematology traits measured in 6015 individuals from the Australian and Dutch populations. These traits included hemoglobin composition, platelet counts, and red blood cell and white blood cell indices. We identified three regions of strong association that, to our knowledge, have not been previously reported in the literature. The first was located in an intergenic region of chromosome 9q31 near LPAR1, explaining 1.5% of the variation in monocyte counts (best SNP rs7023923, p=8.9x10(-14)). The second locus was located on chromosome 6p21 and associated with mean cell erythrocyte volume (rs12661667, p=1.2x10(-9), 0.7% variance explained) in a region that spanned five genes, including CCND3, a member of the D-cyclin gene family that is involved in hematopoietic stem cell expansion. The third region was also associated with erythrocyte volume and was located in an intergenic region on chromosome 6q24 (rs592423, p=5.3x10(-9), 0.6% variance explained). All three loci replicated in an independent panel of 1543 individuals (p values=0.001, 9.9x10(-5), and 7x10(-5), respectively). The identification of these QTL provides new opportunities for furthering our understanding of the mechanisms regulating hemopoietic cell fate.
19716112	Mutations of the FHL1 gene cause Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a rare disorder characterized by early joint contractures, muscular dystrophy, and cardiac involvement with conduction defects and arrhythmias. So far, only 35% of EDMD cases are genetically elucidated and associated with EMD or LMNA gene mutations, suggesting the existence of additional major genes. By whole-genome scan, we identified linkage to the Xq26.3 locus containing the FHL1 gene in three informative families belonging to our EMD- and LMNA-negative cohort. Analysis of the FHL1 gene identified seven mutations, in the distal exons of FHL1 in these families, three additional families, and one isolated case, which differently affect the three FHL1 protein isoforms: two missense mutations affecting highly conserved cysteines, one abolishing the termination codon, and four out-of-frame insertions or deletions. The predominant phenotype was characterized by myopathy with scapulo-peroneal and/or axial distribution, as well as joint contractures, and associated with a peculiar cardiac disease characterized by conduction defects, arrhythmias, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in all index cases of the seven families. Heterozygous female carriers were either asymptomatic or had cardiac disease and/or mild myopathy. Interestingly, four of the FHL1-mutated male relatives had isolated cardiac disease, and an overt hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was present in two. Expression and functional studies demonstrated that the FHL1 proteins were severely reduced in all tested patients and that this was associated with a severe delay in myotube formation in the two patients for whom myoblasts were available. In conclusion, FHL1 should be considered as a gene associated with the X-linked EDMD phenotype, as well as with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
19327736	TMEM126A, encoding a mitochondrial protein, is mutated in autosomal-recessive nonsyndromic optic atrophy. Nonsyndromic autosomal-recessive optic neuropathies are rare conditions of unknown genetic and molecular origin. Using an approach of whole-genome homozygosity mapping and positional cloning, we have identified the first gene, to our knowledge, responsible for this condition, TMEM126A, in a large multiplex inbred Algerian family and subsequently in three other families originating from the Maghreb. TMEM126A is conserved in higher eukaryotes and encodes a transmembrane mitochondrial protein of unknown function, supporting the view that mitochondrial dysfunction may be a hallmark of inherited optic neuropathies including isolated autosomal-recessive forms.
19931040	Simultaneous genotype calling and haplotype phasing improves genotype accuracy and reduces false-positive associations for genome-wide association studies. We present a novel method for simultaneous genotype calling and haplotype-phase inference. Our method employs the computationally efficient BEAGLE haplotype-frequency model, which can be applied to large-scale studies with millions of markers and thousands of samples. We compare genotype calls made with our method to genotype calls made with the BIRDSEED, CHIAMO, GenCall, and ILLUMINUS genotype-calling methods, using genotype data from the Illumina 550K and Affymetrix 500K arrays. We show that our method has higher genotype-call accuracy and yields fewer uncalled genotypes than competing methods. We perform single-marker analysis of data from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium bipolar disorder and type 2 diabetes studies. For bipolar disorder, the genotype calls in the original study yield 25 markers with apparent false-positive association with bipolar disorder at a p < 10(-7) significance level, whereas genotype calls made with our method yield no associated markers at this significance threshold. Conversely, for markers with replicated association with type 2 diabetes, there is good concordance between genotype calls used in the original study and calls made by our method. Results from single-marker and haplotypic analysis of our method's genotype calls for the bipolar disorder study indicate that our method is highly effective at eliminating genotyping artifacts that cause false-positive associations in genome-wide association studies. Our new genotype-calling methods are implemented in the BEAGLE and BEAGLECALL software packages.
19732864	Allele-specific chromatin remodeling in the ZPBP2/GSDMB/ORMDL3 locus associated with the risk of asthma and autoimmune disease. Common SNPs in the chromosome 17q12-q21 region alter the risk for asthma, type 1 diabetes, primary biliary cirrhosis, and Crohn disease. Previous reports by us and others have linked the disease-associated genetic variants with changes in expression of GSDMB and ORMDL3 transcripts in human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). The variants also alter regulation of other transcripts, and this domain-wide cis-regulatory effect suggests a mechanism involving long-range chromatin interactions. Here, we further dissect the disease-linked haplotype and identify putative causal DNA variants via a combination of genetic and functional analyses. First, high-throughput resequencing of the region and genotyping of potential candidate variants were performed. Next, additional mapping of allelic expression differences in Yoruba HapMap LCLs allowed us to fine-map the basis of the cis-regulatory differences to a handful of candidate functional variants. Functional assays identified allele-specific differences in nucleosome distribution, an allele-specific association with the insulator protein CTCF, as well as a weak promoter activity for rs12936231. Overall, this study shows a common disease allele linked to changes in CTCF binding and nucleosome occupancy leading to altered domain-wide cis-regulation. Finally, a strong association between asthma and cis-regulatory haplotypes was observed in three independent family-based cohorts (p = 1.78 x 10(-8)). This study demonstrates the requirement of multiple parallel allele-specific tools for the investigation of noncoding disease variants and functional fine-mapping of human disease-associated haplotypes.
19118813	Fine mapping on chromosome 10q22-q23 implicates Neuregulin 3 in schizophrenia. Linkage studies have implicated 10q22-q23 as a schizophrenia (SZ) susceptibility locus in Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) and Han Chinese from Taiwan populations. To further explore our previous linkage signal in the AJ population (NPL score: 4.27, empirical p = 2 x 10(-5)), we performed a peakwide association fine mapping study by using 1414 SNPs across approximately 12.5 Mb in 10q22-q23. We genotyped 1515 AJ individuals, including 285 parent-child trios, 173 unrelated cases, and 487 unrelated controls. We analyzed the binary diagnostic phenotype of SZ and 9 heritable quantitative traits derived from a principal components factor analysis of 73 items from our consensus diagnostic ratings and direct assessment interviews. Although no marker withstood multiple test correction for association with the binary SZ phenotype, we found strong evidence of association by using the "delusion" factor as the quantitative trait at three SNPs (rs10883866, rs10748842, and rs6584400) located in a 13 kb interval in intron 1 of Neuregulin 3 (NRG3). Our best p value from family-based association analysis was 7.26 x 10(-7). We replicated this association in the collection of 173 unrelated AJ cases (p = 1.55 x 10(-2)), with a combined p value of 2.30 x 10(-7). After performing 10,000 permutations of each of the phenotypes, we estimated the empirical study-wide significance across all 9 factors (90,000 permutations) to be p = 2.7 x 10(-3). NRG3 is primarily expressed in the central nervous system and is one of three paralogs of NRG1, a gene strongly implicated in SZ. These biological properties together with our linkage and association results strongly support NRG3 as a gene involved in SZ.
19268277	Mutations in SPATA7 cause Leber congenital amaurosis and juvenile retinitis pigmentosa. Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and juvenile retinitis pigmentosa (RP) are the most common hereditary causes of visual impairment in infants and children. Using homozygosity mapping, we narrowed down the critical region of the LCA3 locus to 3.8 Mb between markers D14S1022 and D14S1005. By direct Sanger sequencing of all genes within this region, we found a homozygous nonsense mutation in the SPATA7 gene in Saudi Arabian family KKESH-060. Three other loss-of-function mutations were subsequently discovered in patients with LCA or juvenile RP from distinct populations. Furthermore, we determined that Spata7 is expressed in the mature mouse retina. Our findings reveal another human visual-disease gene that causes LCA and juvenile RP.
19896111	Common variants in the trichohyalin gene are associated with straight hair in Europeans. Hair morphology is highly differentiated between populations and among people of European ancestry. Whereas hair morphology in East Asian populations has been studied extensively, relatively little is known about the genetics of this trait in Europeans. We performed a genome-wide association scan for hair morphology (straight, wavy, curly) in three Australian samples of European descent. All three samples showed evidence of association implicating the Trichohyalin gene (TCHH), which is expressed in the developing inner root sheath of the hair follicle, and explaining approximately 6% of variance (p=1.5x10(-31)). These variants are at their highest frequency in Northern Europeans, paralleling the distribution of the straight-hair EDAR variant in Asian populations.
19836010	Mutations in LTBP4 cause a syndrome of impaired pulmonary, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, musculoskeletal, and dermal development. We report recessive mutations in the gene for the latent transforming growth factor-beta binding protein 4 (LTBP4) in four unrelated patients with a human syndrome disrupting pulmonary, gastrointestinal, urinary, musculoskeletal, craniofacial, and dermal development. All patients had severe respiratory distress, with cystic and atelectatic changes in the lungs complicated by tracheomalacia and diaphragmatic hernia. Three of the four patients died of respiratory failure. Cardiovascular lesions were mild, limited to pulmonary artery stenosis and patent foramen ovale. Gastrointestinal malformations included diverticulosis, enlargement, tortuosity, and stenosis at various levels of the intestinal tract. The urinary tract was affected by diverticulosis and hydronephrosis. Joint laxity and low muscle tone contributed to musculoskeletal problems compounded by postnatal growth delay. Craniofacial features included microretrognathia, flat midface, receding forehead, and wide fontanelles. All patients had cutis laxa. Four of the five identified LTBP4 mutations led to premature termination of translation and destabilization of the LTBP4 mRNA. Impaired synthesis and lack of deposition of LTBP4 into the extracellular matrix (ECM) caused increased transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) activity in cultured fibroblasts and defective elastic fiber assembly in all tissues affected by the disease. These molecular defects were associated with blocked alveolarization and airway collapse in the lung. Our results show that coupling of TGF-beta signaling and ECM assembly is essential for proper development and is achieved in multiple human organ systems by multifunctional proteins such as LTBP4.
19664745	Dominant renin gene mutations associated with early-onset hyperuricemia, anemia, and chronic kidney failure. Through linkage analysis and candidate gene sequencing, we identified three unrelated families with the autosomal-dominant inheritance of early onset anemia, hypouricosuric hyperuricemia, progressive kidney failure, and mutations resulting either in the deletion (p.Leu16del) or the amino acid exchange (p.Leu16Arg) of a single leucine residue in the signal sequence of renin. Both mutations decrease signal sequence hydrophobicity and are predicted by bioinformatic analyses to damage targeting and cotranslational translocation of preprorenin into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Transfection and in vitro studies confirmed that both mutations affect ER translocation and processing of nascent preprorenin, resulting either in reduced (p.Leu16del) or abolished (p.Leu16Arg) prorenin and renin biosynthesis and secretion. Expression of renin and other components of the renin-angiotensin system was decreased accordingly in kidney biopsy specimens from affected individuals. Cells stably expressing the p.Leu16del protein showed activated ER stress, unfolded protein response, and reduced growth rate. It is likely that expression of the mutant proteins has a dominant toxic effect gradually reducing the viability of renin-expressing cells. This alters the intrarenal renin-angiotensin system and the juxtaglomerular apparatus functionality and leads to nephron dropout and progressive kidney failure. Our findings provide insight into the functionality of renin-angiotensin system and stress the importance of renin analysis in families and individuals with early onset hyperuricemia, anemia, and progressive kidney failure.
19576569	Diverse evolutionary histories for beta-adrenoreceptor genes in humans. In humans, three genes--ADRB1, ADRB2 and ADRB3--encode beta-adrenoreceptors (ADRB); these molecules mediate the action of catecholamines in multiple tissues and play pivotal roles in cardiovascular, respiratory, metabolic, and immunological functions. Genetic variants in ADRB genes have been associated with widespread diseases and conditions, but inconsistent results have often been obtained. Here, we addressed the recent evolutionary history of ADRB genes in human populations. Although ADRB1 is neutrally evolving, most tests rejected neutral evolution for ADRB2 in European, African, and Asian population samples. Analysis of inferred haplotypes for ADRB2 revealed three major clades with a coalescence time of 1-1.5 million years, suggesting that the gene is either subjected to balancing selection or undergoing a selective sweep. Haplotype analysis also revealed ethnicity-specific differences. Additionally, we observed significant deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for ADRB2 genotypes in distinct European cohorts; HWE deviation depends on sex (only females are in disequilibrium), and genotypes displaying maximum and minimum relative fitness differ across population samples, suggesting a complex situation possibly involving epistasis or maternal selection. Overall, our data indicate that future association studies involving ADRB2 will benefit from taking into account ethnicity-specific haplotype distributions and sex-based effects. With respect to ADRB3, our data indicate that the gene has been subjected to a selective sweep in African populations, the Trp64 variant possibly representing the selection target. Given the previous association of the ancestral ADRB3 Arg64 allele with obesity and type 2 diabetes, dietary adaptations might represent the underlying selective force.
19230858	A genome-wide analysis identifies genetic variants in the RELN gene associated with otosclerosis. Otosclerosis is a common form of progressive hearing loss, characterized by abnormal bone remodeling in the otic capsule. The etiology of the disease is largely unknown, and both environmental and genetic factors have been implicated. To identify genetic factors involved in otosclerosis, we used a case-control discovery group to complete a genome-wide association (GWA) study with 555,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), utilizing pooled DNA samples. By individual genotyping of the top 250 SNPs in a stepwise strategy, we were able to identify two highly associated SNPs that replicated in two additional independent populations. We then genotyped 79 tagSNPs to fine map the two genomic regions defined by the associated SNPs. The region with the strongest association signal, p(combined) = 6.23 x 10(-10), is on chromosome 7q22.1 and spans intron 1 to intron 4 of reelin (RELN), a gene known for its role in neuronal migration. Evidence for allelic heterogeneity was found in this region. Consistent with the GWA data, expression of RELN was confirmed in the inner ear and in stapes footplate specimens. In conclusion, we provide evidence that implicates RELN in the pathogenesis of otosclerosis.
19896112	CNTNAP2 and NRXN1 are mutated in autosomal-recessive Pitt-Hopkins-like mental retardation and determine the level of a common synaptic protein in Drosophila. Heterozygous copy-number variants and SNPs of CNTNAP2 and NRXN1, two distantly related members of the neurexin superfamily, have been repeatedly associated with a wide spectrum of neuropsychiatric disorders, such as developmental language disorders, autism spectrum disorders, epilepsy, and schizophrenia. We now identified homozygous and compound-heterozygous deletions and mutations via molecular karyotyping and mutational screening in CNTNAP2 and NRXN1 in four patients with severe mental retardation (MR) and variable features, such as autistic behavior, epilepsy, and breathing anomalies, phenotypically overlapping with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. With a frequency of at least 1% in our cohort of 179 patients, recessive defects in CNTNAP2 appear to significantly contribute to severe MR. Whereas the established synaptic role of NRXN1 suggests that synaptic defects contribute to the associated neuropsychiatric disorders and to severe MR as reported here, evidence for a synaptic role of the CNTNAP2-encoded protein CASPR2 has so far been lacking. Using Drosophila as a model, we now show that, as known for fly Nrx-I, the CASPR2 ortholog Nrx-IV might also localize to synapses. Overexpression of either protein can reorganize synaptic morphology and induce increased density of active zones, the synaptic domains of neurotransmitter release. Moreover, both Nrx-I and Nrx-IV determine the level of the presynaptic active-zone protein bruchpilot, indicating a possible common molecular mechanism in Nrx-I and Nrx-IV mutant conditions. We therefore propose that an analogous shared synaptic mechanism contributes to the similar clinical phenotypes resulting from defects in human NRXN1 and CNTNAP2.
19804848	Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 5 (FHL-5) is caused by mutations in Munc18-2 and impaired binding to syntaxin 11. Rapid intracellular transport and secretion of cytotoxic granules through the immunological synapse requires a balanced interaction of several proteins. Disturbance of this highly regulated process underlies familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL), a genetically heterogeneous autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by a severe hyperinflammatory phenotype. Here, we have assigned FHL-5 to a 1 Mb region on chromosome 19p by using high-resolution SNP genotyping in eight unrelated FHL patients from consanguineous families. Subsequently, we found nine different mutations, either truncating or missense, in STXBP2 in twelve patients from Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Central Europe. STXBP2 encodes syntaxin binding protein 2 (Munc18-2), involved in the regulation of vesicle transport to the plasma membrane. We have identified syntaxin 11, a SNARE protein mutated in FHL-4, as an interaction partner of STXBP2. This interaction is eliminated by the missense mutations found in our FHL-5 patients, which leads to a decreased stability of both proteins, as shown in patient lymphocytes. Activity of natural killer and cytotoxic T cells was markedly reduced or absent, as determined by CD107 degranulation. Our findings thus identify a key role for STXBP2 in lytic granule exocytosis.
19559399	Loss-of-function mutation in the dioxygenase-encoding FTO gene causes severe growth retardation and multiple malformations. FTO is a nuclear protein belonging to the AlkB-related non-haem iron- and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase family. Although polymorphisms within the first intron of the FTO gene have been associated with obesity, the physiological role of FTO remains unknown. Here we show that a R316Q mutation, inactivating FTO enzymatic activity, is responsible for an autosomal-recessive lethal syndrome. Cultured skin fibroblasts from affected subjects showed impaired proliferation and accelerated senescence. These findings indicate that FTO is essential for normal development of the central nervous and cardiovascular systems in human and establish that a mutation in a human member of the AlkB-related dioxygenase family results in a severe polymalformation syndrome.
1284474	Mutation creating a new splice site in the growth hormone receptor genes of 37 Ecuadorean patients with Laron syndrome. Laron syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by resistance to growth hormone. We sought to determine the molecular basis of this condition in an Ecuadorean population with a high incidence of affected individuals. Growth hormone receptor gene sequences from an obligate heterozygote were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and screened for mutations using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Only exon 6 revealed homo- and heteroduplexes on denaturing gradient gels. Sequencing revealed a substitution of guanine for adenine in the third position of codon 180 that did not change the amino acid encoded. Sequencing of the exon 6-exon 7 splice junction from RNA-polymerase chain reaction amplified cellular RNA of an affected individual revealed that the substitution activates a 5' splice site 24 nucleotides upstream from the normal exon 6-intron 6 boundary. Splicing in two probands' lymphoblasts occurred virtually exclusively at the abnormal 5' splice site created by the codon 180 substitution. Exon 6 sequences from 38 patients and 47 relatives were amplified and analyzed by sequencing or dot-blot hybridization with allele-specific oligonucleotides. The substitution was detected in 74 of 76 Laron syndrome patients' GH-receptor alleles. All 26 parents and 12 of 21 unaffected siblings were heterozygous for this mutation. It was absent in 61 unrelated unaffected control individuals. We conclude that the codon 180 nucleotide substitution probably causes Laron syndrome as translation of the observed, abnormally spliced growth hormone receptor transcript would lead to the synthesis of a receptor protein with an 8 amino acid deletion from the extracellular domain.
1284534	Mutations and sequence variations detected in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene: a report from the Cystic Fibrosis Genetic Analysis Consortium. Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal disorder in the Caucasian population. Since the description of the major mutation of this disease in 1989, over 150 of additional mutations have been identified in the CFTR gene. This update summarizes the different mutations identified and reported before March 15 by members of the international Cystic Fibrosis Genetic Analysis Consortium. The report includes information on DNA sequence variations found in the gene.
1284538	Four new mutations of the CFTR gene (541delC, R347H, R352Q, E585X) detected by DGGE analysis in Italian CF patients, associated with different clinical phenotypes. The delta 508 mutation accounts for about 53% of the molecular defects causing cystic fibrosis (CF) in Italy. The numerous additional mutations detected so far are all relatively rare, and about 30% of CF chromosomes carries unknown mutations in our patients. In order to identify the non-delta F508 mutations causing CF in our population, we performed GC-clamped denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) on 9 exons of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene in a sample of 86 Italian CF patients carrying unknown mutations on at least one chromosome. Direct sequencing of 17 samples showing an altered electrophoretic mobility allowed the identification of four new mutations (541delC, R347H, R352Q, and E585X), five mutations already known (G85E, I148T, G178R, 1078delT, and R347P), and one rare variant (1898 + 3A-->G). The strategy based on GC-clamped DGGE represents an efficient and rapid approach for mutation detection for those genetic diseases, such as CF, in which a large number of rare molecular defects has been described.
1301924	Myotonic dystrophy: another case of too many repeats? Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an adult form of muscular dystrophy affecting about 1 in 8,000 individuals in most populations. Although common symptoms include progressive muscle weakness and stiffness, it is characterised by a heterogeneous clinical picture. Despite this variation in both the nature and severity of the symptoms seen in affected individuals, DM is genetically homogeneous, segregating as a single locus on the proximal long arm of human chromosome 19. As the biochemical abnormality underlying the disease was unknown, a reverse genetics (or positional cloning) strategy for identifying the gene responsible was adopted. The resulting collaborative effort culminated in the detection of the molecular mutation event and the gene within which it lies: the expansion of a trinucleotide repeat (CTG) at the 3' end of a gene encoding a member of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase family. This has diagnostic implications since an easy, reliable and predictive test can now be offered to individuals with a family history of DM. These findings are also a prerequisite for further studies concerning the biochemical and physiological aetiology of DM and possible therapeutic strategies. In addition, the striking similarity between findings at the DNA level in DM and those in fragile X syndrome and spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy suggests that the mechanism leading to the increase in copy number of trinucleotide repeats at particular loci may be responsible for a number of other genetic diseases.
1301930	A comprehensive scanning method for rapid detection of beta-globin gene mutations and polymorphisms. We describe a scanning procedure for the detection of beta-globin gene mutations and the prenatal diagnosis of beta-thalassemias. The method is based on the combined use of PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) of six amplified fragments encompassing the whole beta-globin coding region and splice junctions, as well as the promoter and 3' untranslated regions. The whole beta-globin gene can be rapidly scanned for the presence of deleterious mutations. The proposed diagnostic strategy provides a major improvement over current approaches to beta-globin gene analysis in both research and clinical laboratories, especially those which analyse DNA samples from individuals belonging to various ethnic or population groups. The use of this procedure has enabled us to detect six novel sequence changes in the beta-globin gene, including two deleterious mutations and four polymorphisms.
1301931	Polymorphic variation within "conserved" sequences at the 3' end of the human RDS gene which results in amino acid substitutions. The human RDS gene, previously mapped to chromosome 6p, encodes a protein found in the outer disc membrane of the photoreceptor cells of the retina. The cDNA sequence of the human gene shows 85% identity with the bovine peripherin gene and the rds (retinal degeneration slow) genes from mouse and rat. Mutations in the RDS gene have recently been implicated in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) in some families. Here we present evidence that the third exon of this gene is subject to polymorphic variation in humans. The three sequence alterations described in this paper give rise to amino acid substitutions. However, as these missense mutations also occur in the normal population they are not implicated as causing adRP. Interestingly such sequence variation is not found within other species examined including mouse and bovine. These intragenic polymorphisms will be of future potential value in studies to locate further disease causing mutations in adRP patients in the RDS gene.
1301933	Rapid preparation of genomic DNA from dried blood and saliva spots for polymerase chain reaction.
1301950	Detection of sequence variants in the gene for human type II procollagen (COL2A1) by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction-amplified genomic DNA. The direct sequencing of the human type II procollagen (COL2A1) gene from polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified genomic DNA is described. Thirty-two regions of the COL2A1 gene were asymmetrically amplified with intron primers which were specifically chosen to amplify a region spanning 500 to 800 bp of sequence encoding one or more exons and their accompanying intervening sequences. Primers for dideoxynucleotide sequencing of the PCR products were then designed to provide complete exon sequence information and to insure that intron:exon splice junction sequence data would be obtained. Amplification and sequencing reactions were performed on an automated workstation to facilitate the handling of multiple DNA templates. The procedure allowed efficient sequencing of over 25,000 bp of each allele of the COL2A1 gene per diploid genome. We used this method for the comparative analyses of COL2A1 sequences in DNA isolated from the blood of 42 unrelated individuals and we identified 21 neutral sequence variants in the gene. The sequence variations were confirmed by independent assays, including restriction enzyme digestion. The sequence variants described here will be important for identifying haplotypes of the type II procollagen gene that will be useful in defining a genetic etiology for diseases of cartilaginous tissues.
1301957	Molecular analysis of neurofibromatosis type 1 mutations. We have examined a panel of 115 unrelated NF1 individuals for mutation in the 3' region of the NF1 gene, using Southern blotting and polymerase chain reaction amplification of exons followed by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. We found only 2 unequivocal mutations: a 571 bp deletion which removed exon 6 and resulted in a frameshift in exon 7, and a 2 bp deletion in exon 1. A third sequence variation detected by SSCP was predicted to cause a lysine-arginine substitution in exon 6. This is a conservative change, and since the affected individual is a new mutation whose parents are not available, we cannot be sure of its biological significance. We detected mutations in at most 3% of individuals, from an analysis which covered 17% of the coding sequence by SSCP and a larger region by Southern blotting. This relative failure to detect mutations accords with the experience of others. Even allowing for the incomplete sensitivity of the methods used, the results suggest that the majority of NF1 mutations lie elsewhere in the coding sequence or outside it.
1363805	Mutations in the medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) gene. Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) catalyzes the first reaction of the beta-oxidation cycle for 4-10-carbon fatty acids. MCAD deficiency is one of the most frequent inborn metabolic disorders in populations of northwestern European origin. In the compilation of data from a worldwide study of 172 unrelated patients each representing an independent pedigree, a total of 8 different mutations have been identified. Among them, a single prevalent mutation, 985A-->G, was found in 90% of 344 variant alleles. 985A-->G causes glutamate substitution for lysine-304 in the mature MCAD subunit, which causes impairment of tetramer assembly and instability of the protein. Three of 7 rarer mutations have been identified in a few unrelated patients, while the remaining 4 have each been found in only a single pedigree. In addition to tabulating the mutations, the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene family, the structure of the MCAD gene and the evolution of 985A-->G mutation are briefly discussed.
7509237	Complex mutation 4114 ATA-->TT in exon 22 of the cystic fibrosis gene CFTR.
7537150	Identification of six mutations (R31L, 441delA, 681delC, 1461ins4, W1089R, E1104X) in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Six new mutations have been identified in the CFTR gene. These mutations, representing three different categories--missense (R31L, W1098R), nonsense (E1104X), and frameshift (441delA, 681delC, 1461ins4)--are located in exons 2, 4, 5, 9, and 17b of the gene and presumed to cause cystic fibrosis (CF) in patients. All these mutations are probably rare in the population, as no additional examples were found for any of them in a cohort of 545 CF patients. Our study also revealed a benign sequence variation (3499 + 45T-->C) in intron 17b.
7550228	Detection and genetic analysis of beta-thalassemia mutations by competitive oligopriming. A new approach for the detection of beta-thalassemia mutations has been applied, based on competitive oligonucleotide priming (COP) of in vitro DNA amplification at the mutation site. This method allows genotyping of the template DNA, through differential labeling of the allele-specific competitive oligoprimers and biotinylation of the common reverse primer. The system provides a basis for rapid, simple, and reliable detection of the numerous known beta-thalassemia mutations, revealing the precise nature of the mismatch in each case, and thereby facilitating the molecular genetic analysis of the disease.
7550232	Four novel mutations underlying mild or intermediate forms of alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency (MPS IS and MPS IH/S). The alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency diseases (Mucopolysaccharidosis I) cover a spectrum of clinical severity ranging from the very severe (Hurler syndrome, MPS IH) through an intermediate (Hurler/Scheie syndrome, MPS IH/S) to a relatively mild form (Scheie syndrome, MPS IS). Numerous mutations of the gene encoding alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA) are known in Hurler syndrome, but only three in the other disorders. We report on novel mutations of the IDUA gene in one patient with the Scheie syndrome and in three patients with the Hurler/Scheie syndrome. The novel mutations, all single base changes, encoded the substitutions R492P (Scheie), and X654G, P496L, and L490P (Hurler/Scheie). The L490P mutation was apparently homozygous, whereas each of the others was found in compound heterozygosity with a Hurler mutation. The deleterious nature of the mutations was confirmed by absence of enzyme activity upon transfection of the corresponding mutagenized cDNAs into Cos-1 cells. These results provide additional information for genotype-phenotype correlations.
7581409	Two new mutations, Q473X and N487S, in a Caucasian patient with mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (Morquio disease).
7599639	Novel (cys152 > arg) missense mutation in an Arab patient with Canavan disease.
7599640	Mutations of the iduronate-2-sulfatase gene on a T146T background in three patients with Hunter syndrome.
7728151	Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene: correlations with phenotype. von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is an inherited neoplastic disease characterized by a predisposition to develop retinal angiomas, central nervous system hemangioblastomas, renal cell carcinomas, pancreatic cysts, and pheochromocytomas. The VHL gene was recently isolated by positional cloning. The cDNA encodes 852 nucleotides in 3 exons. The VHL gene is unrelated to any known gene families. We identified germline mutations in 85/114 (75%) of VHL families. Clinical heterogeneity is a well-known feature of VHL. VHL families were classified into 2 types based on the presence or absence of pheochromocytoma. The types of mutations responsible for VHL without pheochromocytoma (VHL type 1) differed from those responsible for VHL with pheochromocytoma (VHL type 2). Fifty-six % of the mutations responsible for VHL type 1 were microdeletions/insertions, nonsense mutations, or deletions; 96% of the mutations responsible for VHL type 2 were missense mutations. Specific mutations in codon 238 accounted for 43% of the mutations responsible for VHL type 2. The mutations identified in these families will be useful in presymptomatic diagnosis. The identification of mutations associated with phenotypes contributes to the understanding of fundamental genetic mechanisms of VHL disease.
7728155	Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase gene: a novel 68-bp deletion involving 3' splice site of intron 7, causing exon 8 skipping in a Caucasian patient with beta-ketothiolase deficiency.
7866409	Mutation at the catalytic site (M519V) in glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe disease).
7951257	Detecting prion protein gene mutations by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Mutations of the prion protein (PrP) gene are present in patients with Gerstmann-Strussler-Scheinker syndrome (GSS), familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), and fatal familial insomnia (FFI). We developed a denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) strategy that readily identifies point mutations in the PrP coding sequence. By comparison with appropriate controls, haplotypes often may be deduced. This method permits samples from many patients with GSS, CJD, as well as patients with unusual degenerative neurologic disorders, to be screened rapidly, sensitively, and inexpensively for the presence of known and novel PrP mutations. We illustrate the sensitivity of this approach by reporting 2 novel polymorphisms in the PrP coding sequence.
7981715	Complex arylsulfatase A alleles causing metachromatic leukodystrophy. Metachromatic leukodystrophy is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of arylsulfatase A. Sequencing of the arylsulfatase A genes of a patient affected with late infantile metachromatic leukodystrophy revealed that the patient is a compound heterozygote of two alleles carrying two deleterious mutation each. One allele bears a splice donor site mutation together with two polymorphisms and an additional missense mutation (Gly122 > Ser). The splice donor site mutation and the Gly122 > Ser substitution have been described recently but on different alleles. The other allele carries two missense mutations causing a Gly154 > Asp and a Pro167 > Arg substitution. When arylsulfatase A cDNAs carrying these mutations separately or in combination were transfected into baby hamster kidney cells expression of arylsulfatase A activity could not be detected. Linkage of mutations was verified by sequencing of the parental DNAs. Biosynthesis studies performed with the patients' fibroblasts show that the enzyme carrying both mutations is synthesized in almost normal amounts but is rapidly degraded in an early biosynthetic compartment. The occurence of two disease causing mutations on the same allele is a novel phenomenon in metachromatic leukodystrophy and as far as lysosomal storage diseases are concerned have so far only been described in Fabry disease and in the complex glucocerebrosidase alleles associated with Gaucher disease.
7981720	Molecular characterization of a DDEI melting polymorphism at the angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) locus.
7981721	A tandem CC-->TT transition in the p53 gene of a breast cancer.
8019556	Mutations in PAX3 associated with Waardenburg syndrome type I. Waardenburg syndrome (WS) types I, II, and III (McKusick #14882, #19351, and #19350) are related autosomal dominant disorders characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, dystopia canthorum, pigmentary disturbances, and other developmental defects. Disease causing PAX3 mutations have been identified in a few families from each of the three disease subtypes, WS-I, WS-II, and WS-III. In others, although the mutations have not been pinpointed, linkage with the PAX3 locus on chromosome 2q35 has been demonstrated. The PAX3 protein is a transcription factor that contains both a paired-domain and a homeodomain DNA binding motif and appears to play a key role during embryogenesis. In this report, we describe two mutations in the human PAX3 gene that cause WS type I. One mutation is a deletion/frameshift in the paired-domain of PAX3 and results in a protein without functional DNA binding domains. The second mutation is a single-base substitution and results in a premature termination codon in the homeodomain of PAX3. This is the first demonstration of a mutation in the homeodomain DNA binding motif in this protein resulting in WS and one of the few examples of a mutation in a homeodomain of any protein that results in human disease.
8019568	Phenylketonuria in China: identification and characterization of three novel nucleotide substitutions in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene.
8081391	Mutations in steroid 21-hydroxylase (CYP21). The inherited inability to synthesize cortisol is termed congenital adrenal hyperplasia. More than 90% of cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency. This syndrome is characterized by signs of androgen excess and often mineralocorticoid deficiency. Steroid 21-hydroxylase (P450c21) is a microsomal enzyme expressed in the adrenal gland that catalyzes conversion of 17-hydroxyprogesterone and progesterone to 11-deoxycortisol and deoxycorticosterone respectively. In man, this enzyme is encoded by the CYP21 (CYP21B) gene which is located in the HLA major histocompatibility complex along with a pseudogene, CYP21P (CYP21A). Mutations in CYP21 causing congenital adrenal hyperplasia are almost all generated by recombinations between CYP21 and CYP21P. These recombinations either delete CYP21 or transfer deleterious mutations from CYP21P to CYP21, a process termed apparent gene conversion. The degree of enzymatic compromise caused by each mutation is correlated with the clinical severity of the deficiency observed in patients carrying that mutation.
8100466	Detection of polymorphisms using thermal cycling with a single oligonucleotide on a DNA sequencing gel. A method is described for the detection of restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) in single copy genes in mammalian cells using one 5'-labelled oligonucleotide. This linear amplification (LA) method employs a single oligonucleotide as primer, which is extended by Taq DNA polymerase up to a restriction enzyme cleavage site. The products are arithmetically amplified by thermal cycling. The size of the products are determined by the sequence of the oligonucleotide and the position of the restriction enzyme cleavage site. Hence, an RFLP can be observed by measuring the size of the products. Polymorphisms which differ in size by a small number of base pairs, as are found in (CA)n repeats, are especially suitable for analysis by the LA procedure since the products are run on DNA sequencing gels. A number of genes were examined by the procedure and all produced a satisfactory signal including GC-rich template. It is proposed that the LA method would be suitable for large-scale genetic linkage analysis. The LA procedure has many advantages including the ability to multiplex signals under the same conditions, and lower cost since only one primer is needed.
8199594	Identification of a point mutation and germinal mosaicism in a Duchenne muscular dystrophy family. Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD and BMD) are allelic X-linked disorders arising from mutations in the (2.4 Mb) dystrophin gene at Xp21. We have applied the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to identify a larger than normal dystrophin mRNA from a male with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and his younger affected brother. The increased size of the dystrophin mRNA was due to a splice-site mutation at the exon 26:intron 26 junction where a T to G substitution prevented normal RNA processing. A cryptic splice-site, downstream of the mutation, was activated during processing, resulting in the inclusion of 117 bases of intron 26. This insertion introduced an in-frame stop codon into the mature dystrophin mRNA. An allele-specific test was developed to identify the mutation and was applied to this family. Interestingly, the mother of the two affected boys did not carry the mutation, as determined by allele-specific amplification and direct DNA sequence analysis, indicating gonadal mosaicism. Her eldest daughter, designated as a carrier based upon conventional testing and haplotype analysis, also did not carry the family mutation. Initial haplotyping of the family appeared to be straightforward with gonadal mosaicism becoming evident only after allele-specific analysis. The application of linked markers to identify the disease allele for conventional genetic counselling would have been erroneous in this family and highlights the diagnostic power of precise identification of the disease-causing mutation.
8199597	Sequence of the -530 region of the beta-globin gene of sickle cell anemia patients with the Arabian haplotype.
8257990	Base substitutions in the human dystrophin gene: detection by using the single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique. We have established the experimental conditions to screen twenty regions of the dystrophin gene using the method of single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. The aim of this study was to identify point mutations in patients with Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD or BMD) who have no gross DNA rearrangements detectable by Southern blot analysis or multiplex exon amplification. The investigation of thirteen patients using this procedure resulted in the detection of seven sequence polymorphisms (four identified in this study) that will be useful allelic markers in familial DNA analysis. Three rare sequence variants could be found (two of them being novel variants) but we were unable to demonstrate mutations that could be clearly sufficient to be responsible for the phenotype. This analysis confirmed the efficiency of the SSCP technique for the detection of nucleotide substitutions. Application of this approach to mutation or polymorphism detection to other exons of the gene will improve carrier and prenatal diagnosis.
8318989	Screening for molecular pathologies in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Heteroduplex detection by hydrolink gel electrophoresis was performed to screen for small mutations in 12 Lesch-Nyhan syndrome families with characterised molecular pathology which included nine point mutations, two small deletions, and a 1-bp insertion. This modified protocol for heteroduplex detection by hydrolink gel electrophoresis detected all 12 of these mutations and was utilised to rapidly determine the carrier status of females from affected families. On the basis of these results this approach appears to be a rapid and reliable screening method for point mutations in addition to small length mutations and for carrier detection in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.
8318991	Hunter syndrome: gene deletions and rearrangements.
8318995	Sporadic alleles, including a novel mutation, characterize beta-thalassemia in Ashkenazi Jews.
8364588	Paternal mosaicism for a COL1A1 dominant mutation (alpha 1 Ser-415) causes recurrent osteogenesis imperfecta. We describe a dominant point mutation in the COL1A1 gene causing extremely severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI type II/III) which was detected in the dermal fibroblasts of a proband, diagnosed by ultrasonography at 24 weeks of gestation. Type I collagen secretion was reduced and pro alpha 1(I) chains were overmodified. The mutation was localised in one COL1A1 allele by chemical cleavage of mismatched bases in normal cDNA/proband's mRNA heteroduplexes, and identified by cloning and sequencing. A G-to-A transition which causes the substitution of Gly-415 with serine in the alpha 1(I) triple helical domain was found. The same mutation was detected in the father's spermatozoa and lymphocytes. Mosaicism in the father's germline explains the occurrence in the family of two additional OI pregnancies, which were documented by X-ray and ultrasound investigations.
8401541	Two new mutations at the adenosine deaminase (ADA) locus (Q254X and del nt1050-54) unusual for not being missense mutations.
8477262	Identification of mutations in Danish choroideremia families. We have searched for mutations in the choroideremia gene (CHM) in patients from 12 Danish families in which CHM is segregating. Employing polymerase chain reaction (PCR), single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, and direct DNA sequencing, different mutations have been identified in 6 patients. All the mutations will interfere with the correct translation of the mRNA predicting a truncated protein or no gene product at all.
8477263	Molecular characterization of beta-thalassemia in Egyptians. We sought to determine the spectrum of mutations producing beta-thalassemia in Egypt using genomic PCR and a variety of mutation-screening procedures. Thirty-four beta-thalassemia and three Hb S/beta-thalassemia patients originating from different regions of Egypt were studied, and the causative mutation was found in 69 of 71 (97%) beta-thalassemia genes. Four mutations accounted for 78% of beta-thalassemia genes in this population; IVS-1, nt 110 (41%), IVS-1 nt 6 (13%), IVS-1, nt 1 (13%), and IVS-2, nt 848 (11%). The latter allele, a C-A mutation at the third nucleotide of an acceptor site consensus sequence, has been described previously only in one Egyptian, one Iranian, one Tunisian, and one Black American patient. Nine other alleles each accounted for 1-3% of beta-thalassemia genes. Among these was one codon 27 allele (Hb Knossos), two frameshift 106/107 alleles previously seen only in a Black American, and a rarely observed mutation in the distal promoter region of the beta-globin gene, -87 (C-A). Our results suggest that from a molecular genetic standpoint a beta-thalassemia prevention program based on carrier screening and prenatal diagnosis can be implemented in Egypt. In couples at risk for beta-thalassemia, the causative mutation should be identifiable in both members in 92% and in one member in the remaining 8%.
8535441	Comparison between medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase mutant proteins overexpressed in bacterial and mammalian cells. Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is a potentially lethal inherited defect in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids. By comparing the behaviour of five missense MCAD mutant proteins expressed in COS cells and in Escherichia coli, we can define some of these as "pure folding mutants." Upon expression in E. coli, these mutant proteins produce activity levels in the range of the wild-type enzyme only if the chaperonins GroESL are co-overproduced. When overexpressed in COS cells, the pure folding mutants display enzyme activities comparable to the wild-type enzyme. The results suggest that the MCAD mutations can be modulated by chaperones, a phenomenon that may influence the manifestation of the MCAD disease.
8535449	A 48-bp insertion between exon 13 and 14 of the HEXB gene causes infantile-onset Sandhoff disease.
8723680	Characterization of two arylsulfatase A missense mutations D335V and T274M causing late infantile metachromatic leukodystrophy. Metachromatic leukodystrophy is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of arylsulfatase A. We describe a novel missense mutation in exon 6 causing the substitution of Asp335 by Val. In transient transfections no enzyme activity could be expressed from the arylsulfatase A cDNA carrying this mutation. Examination of the effects of the mutation in cells stably overexpressing the mutant enzyme revealed, that the mutant enzyme is catalytically inactive and degraded in an early biosynthetic compartment. We have also investigated the effects of a previously identified mutation (T274M). The specific catalytic activity of the Met274 substituted arylsulfatase is reduced to about 35% of the normal enzyme when measured with an artificial substrate. Most of this enzyme is also degraded in an early biosynthetic compartment.
8723688	Two novel frameshift mutations causing premature stop codons in a patient with the severe form of Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome.
8723698	Simple detection of a (Finnish) hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 mutation.
8829645	A 66-basepair insertion in exon 6 of the alpha-L-fucosidase gene of a fucosidosis patient.
8829650	Molecular basis of congenital erythropoietic porphyria: mutations in the human uroporphyrinogen III synthase gene. Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism that results from the markedly deficient activity of the fourth enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway, uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-synthase). To date, 17 mutations have been described including 11 missense, one nonsense, two mRNA splicing defects, one deletion and two coding region insertions. Most mutations have been identified in one or a few unrelated families with the exception of C73R and L4F which occurred in 29.6% and 9.3% of the 54 mutant alleles studied, respectively. Interestingly, analysis of the mutant alleles identified only 83% of the causative mutations, suggesting that about 20% of the mutations causing CEP lie elsewhere in the gene. Of note, mutation V82F, resulting from a G to T transversion of the last nucleotide of exon 4, caused both a missense mutation and an aberrantly spliced RNA transcript. Prokaryotic expression of the mutant URO-synthase alleles identified those with significant residual activity, thereby permitting genotype/phenotype predictions for this clinically heterogeneous disease.
8829663	Two novel (1098insA and Y313H) and one rare (R359Q) mutations detected in exon 8 of the beta-glucocerebrosidase gene in Gaucher's disease patients.
8956037	A novel deletion/inversion mutation in the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene as a cause of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. A combined deletion/inversion rearrangement of the LDL receptor gene was discovered in a Finnish patient with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Sequence analysis of the mutated allele revealed an insertion of 4 nucleotides in exon 11, caused by a combined deletion and insertion event replacing a 13-bp segment of the normal exon 11 sequence of the LDL receptor gene by a 17-bp stretch of new sequence at the deletion breakpoint. The inserted sequence was identical to the normal exon 9 sequence of the LDL receptor gene from nt1225 to nt1241 inserted in an inverted orientation. This defect causes a translational frameshift after amino acid 525 (glycine) and leads to a premature termination codon at amino acid position 538. Analysis of reverse transcriptase-PCR products from total RNA extracted from cultured fibroblasts revealed only transcripts encoded by the normal allele. This finding was consistent with the reduced functional activity of the LDL receptor found in the fibroblasts of the patient to levels less than 50% of those in normal cells. In conclusion, we have identified a complex and hitherto unreported type of rearrangement of the human LDL receptor gene. The precise mechanism of this mutation (designated as FH-Jalasjrvi) remains obscure, although it may involve complex loop formation by interaction of complementary sequences present in the mutation breakpoints and their immediate flanking regions.
8956047	A new mutation (LIPA Tyr22X) of lysosomal acid lipase gene in a Japanese patient with Wolman disease.
8956055	Identification of a novel R552O mutation in exon 13 of the beta-subunit of rod phosphodiesterase gene in a Spanish family with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
8956059	Three novel APC gene mutations in Portuguese FAP kindreds.
9067759	Three novel PAX3 mutations observed in patients with Waardenburg syndrome type 1.
9090528	Mutations and DNA diagnoses of classical citrullinemia. Classical citrullinemia is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a genetic deficiency of argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS). We have previously identified 20 mutations in ASS mRNA of human classical citrullinemia and already established the DNA diagnosis of seven mutations as follows. By Southern blot analysis, each of the alleles with exon 5 or 6 deletion in mRNA appears to involve deletion of genomic DNA from this region. Five mutations involving R304W, G324S, IVS-6(-2) (delta Ex7), IVS-13(+5) (delta Ex13), and delta 13 bp/Ex15&IVS-15 (ins37 b/Ex15&16) are diagnosed by a combination of PCR (or modified PCR) and restriction enzyme digestion. It is important to identify the mutation in genomic DNA for prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection. In the present study, we report a novel missense mutation (R279Q) and a new abnormality in the ASS gene (delta 11 bp/IVS-15). As three missense mutations (R272C, R279Q, and G280R) were found in exon 12, we isolated and sequenced the intron regions surrounding exon 12 to establish a DNA diagnostic test. Although a mutation with a deletion of the first seven bases in exon 16 of mRNA (delta 7 b/Ex16) was found in both Japanese and American patients, the abnormality on the ASS gene was different between the Japanese allele (delta 11 bp/IVS-15) and American allele (IVS-15(-1)). The DNA diagnosis of 47 Japanese alleles with classical citrullinemia showed that the IVS-6(-2) and R304W mutations were found in 49% and 17% of the mutated alleles, respectively. We now have DNA diagnosis systems to detect 14 out of 22 mutations and are performing prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection using genomic DNA on classical citrullinemia.
9143924	Two mutations in the same low-density lipoprotein receptor allele act in synergy to reduce receptor function in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Mutations in genes are not necessarily pathogenic. Expression of mutant genes in cells can therefore be required to demonstrate that mutations in fact disturb protein function. This applies especially to missense mutations, which cause an amino acid to be replaced by another amino acid. In the present study of two families with familial hypercholesterolemia in the heterozygous form, we found two mutations in the same allele of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene: a missense Asn543. His mutation (N543H) in exon 11, and an in-frame 9-bp deletion (2393del9) in exon 17. The two mutations were identified in heterozygous FH index patients in whom no other pathogenic mutations were detected by SSCP analysis of the remaining 16 exons and the promoter region. Both mutations cosegregated with hypercholesterolemia within the families. Each of these mutations had little or no effect on receptor function in transfected COS cells, but when both mutations were present simultaneously, receptor function, as assessed by flow cytometric measurement of fluorescent LDL uptake in cells, was reduced by 75%. Immunostainable receptors on the cell surface were decreased by 80% as measured by flow cytometry. The two mutations therefore acted in synergy to affect receptor function, possibly during intracellular receptor transport, since Northern blot analysis suggested that mRNA levels were unaffected. Without screening of the entire coding regions of the gene, the synergistic action of these two LDL receptor mutations would not have been detected.
9143927	Deletions spanning the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene: implications for genotype-phenotype correlations in neurofibromatosis type 1? Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by abnormalities of tissues predominantly derived from the neural crest. Symptoms are highly variable and severity cannot be predicted, even within families. DNA of 84 unrelated patients with NF1, unselected for clinical features or severity, were screened with intragenic polymorphic repeat markers and by Southern analysis with cDNA probes. Deletions of the entire gene were detected in five patients from four unrelated families. Their phenotype resembled that of five previously reported patients with deletions, including intellectual impairment and dysmorphic features, but without an excessive number of dermal neurofibromas. This report supports the hypothesis that large deletions spanning the entire NF1 gene may lead to a specific phenotype.
9222768	Novel mutation (A141D) in exon 4 of the CFTR gene identified in an Algerian patient.
9259194	Rapid characterization of the variable length polythymidine tract in the cystic fibrosis (CFTR) gene: association of the 5T allele with selected CFTR mutations and its incidence in atypical sinopulmonary disease. The CFTR intron 8 variable length polythymidine tract modulates the cystic fibrosis (CF) phenotype associated with the mutation R117H. To explore whether other mutations reside on multiple intron 8 backgrounds with discernible impacts on phenotype, we developed an allele-specific PCR assay to characterize this locus. Our approach types samples rapidly without the use or radioisotopes. Polythymidine alleles were identified for mutations either associated with a wide range of clinical phenotypes (R117H, R347P, G85E, D1152H, R334W, 2789 + 5 G > A, 3849 + 10kb C > T), and/or located at hypermutable CpG loci (R117H, 3845 + 10kb C > T, R553X, R334W, S945L and R75Q). R117H was detected in cis with each of three alleles (5T, 7T, 9T) at the intron 8 locus. The novel R117H-9T association was detected in a 10-month African-American male with borderline-to-mildly elevated sweat chloride values (approximately 50-66 mEq/L). All other mutations studied were associated with 7T except 3849 + 10kb C > T, which was detected on both 7T and 9T backgrounds, but not 5T. Three individuals with a delta F508/3849 + 10kb C > T genotype were 9T,9T and had pancreatic sufficiency and normal sweat chloride values, whereas 15 others who carried 3849 + 10kb C > T on a 7T background had variable pancreatic function (sufficient, n = 12, insufficient, n = 3), and variable sweat chloride values (normal, n = 12, elevated, n = 3). Surprisingly, when not associated with known CFTR mutations, 5T was detected with elevated frequency among individuals with sinopulmonary disease of ill-defined etiology, but with some characteristics of variant CF. In summary, the 5T allele was not found in cis with CF-causing mutations besides R117H, but an elevated 5T allele frequency in variant CF patients suggests 5T may be associated with disease in some situations.
9259197	Geographic distribution and regional origin of 272 cystic fibrosis mutations in European populations. The Biomed CF Mutation Analysis Consortium. The geographic distribution of 272 cystic fibrosis (CF) mutations has been studied by assessing the origin of 27,177 CF chromosomes from 29 European countries and three countries from the North of Africa. The most common mutations are delta F308 (66.8%), G542X (2.6%), N1303K (1.6%), G551D (1.5%) and W1282X (1.0%). The delta F508 mutation has the highest frequency in Denmark (87.2%) and the lowest in Algeria (26.3%). Mutation G542X is common in the Mediterranean countries, with a mean frequency of 6.1%. N1303K is found in most of the western and Mediterranean countries and has the highest frequency in Tunisia (17.2%). The wide distribution of these mutations suggests an ancient origin. G551D is common in north-west and central Europe, but is uncommon in other parts of Europe. W1282X has the highest frequency in Israel (36.2%), being also common in most Mediterranean countries and north Africa. Seventeen mutation have frequencies between 0.1 and 0.9%, 1717-1G-->A (0.83%), R553X (0.75%), R1162X (0.51%), 621 + 1G-->T (0.54%) and 2183AA-->G (0.36%), being the most common ones. Some mutations reach relatively high frequencies in some extended geographic regions, such as mutation 394delTT in northern Europe (1.1-28.8%), R117H in northwestern Europe (1.3-3.0%), R553X in central Europe (1.1-24.4%), 1717-1G-->A in Belgium and France (1.1-5.3%), and 2183AA-->G in Italy and Greece (3.2%). Other mutations are only common in small regions: T338I (Sardinia), 711 + 1G-->T (Tunisia), R1162X (Algeria and north of Italy), 1609delCA (east of Spain), 1811 + 1.6kbA-->G (southeastern Spain), R1066C (Portugal), S549R (Algeria), R334W (Crete), 621 + 1G-->T (Central Greece), 3849 + 10kbC-->T (Israel), 2789 + 5G-->A (south of Greece), 451 + 1G--A (Israel), R347P (south of Bulgaria), 1677delTA (south of Bulgaria and Turkey), G85E (south of Greece), R347H (Turkey), 3905insT (Switzerland), 1078delT (Brittany), 1898 + 1G-->A (Wales), A455E (The Netherlands), delta I507 (Brittany), 3659delC (Sweden) and R560T (northern Ireland). Most of these mutations must have an origin and diffusion in the specific European population subgroup. Overall 55 mutations are common in one or several countries or regions of Europe and 217 mutations are rare with relative frequencies of lower than 1% in any of these regions and countries. This information might facilitate mutation analysis of CF in the different regions of Europe.
9375854	Analysis of multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions in inclusion body myositis. Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a sporadic progressive myopathy, which is morphologically characterized by inflammatory cell infiltrates and rimmed vacuoles in muscle fibers. Mitochondrial changes are regularly present with ragged-red fibers showing deficiency of cytochrome c oxidase. In these muscle fiber segments, there is accumulation of mitochondria with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions. There are different deletions in different muscle fibers. In this study, we have sequenced for the first time the multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle from four patients with IBM. The deletion breakpoints were sequenced from cloned polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified mtDNA fragments. The sequencing was performed directly from the bacterial colonies used for cloning. Of 122 analyzed clones, 33 different deletions were identified. The majority of these have not previously been described. There was a marked predominance of deletion breakpoints in certain regions of mtDNA. These predominant breakpoint regions are similar to those described in other conditions with multiple deletions, such as autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia (adPEO) and normal aging, but different from those described in diseases due to single deletions such as Kearns-Sayre syndrome and sporadic PEO. These findings indicate that common factors are involved in the development of multiple mtDNA deletions in IBM, adPEO, and aging.
9401007	Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with intermediate motor nerve conduction velocities: characterization of 14 Cx32 mutations in 35 families. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease can be inherited either autosomal dominantly or recessively or linked to the X chromosome. X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX) is a sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy in which males have usually more severe clinical symptoms and decreased nerve conduction velocities than do females. CMTX is usually associated with mutations in exon 2 of the connexin 32 (Cx32) gene. DNA from 35 unrelated CMT patients, without the 17p11.2 duplication, but with median nerve conduction between 30 and 40 m/s, were tested for the presence of Cx32 mutations. The entire coding sequence of the Cx32 gene was explored using a rapid nonradioactive technique to detect single-strand conformation polymorphisms (SSCP) on large PCR fragments. Thirteen abnormal SSCP profiles were detected and characterized by sequencing. In addition, systematic sequencing of the entire Cx32 coding region in the remaining index cases revealed another mutation that was not detected by SSCP. A total of 14 mutations were found, five of which were not previously reported. These results demonstrate the high frequency (40%) of mutations in the coding region of the Cx32 gene in CMT patients with intermediate MNCV, without 17p11.2 duplications. Most of these mutations (93%) can be detected by SSCP.
9401011	Mutation of hMSH3 and hMSH6 mismatch repair genes in genetically unstable human colorectal and gastric carcinomas. Mutations within microsatellite sequences, consisting of additions or deletions of repeat units, are known as the replication/repair error positive (RER+) phenotype or micorsatellite instability (MI). Microsatellite instability has been demonstrated in hereditary and sporadic colorectal carcinomas and is usually observed in noncoding regions of genomic DNA. However, relatively few coding region targets of MI have been identified thus far. Using PCR, we amplified regions encompassing (A)8 and (C)8 microsatellite tracts within hMSH3 and hMSH6 from 31 RER+ sporadic colorectal tumors, 8 hereditary colon cancers, 23 RER+ gastric carcinomas, and 32 RER- gastric tumors. Mutations were found in 11 (36%) of 31 sporadic colon carcinomas, 4 (50%) of 8 hereditary colorectal cancers, and 5 (22%) of 23 RER+ gastric carcinomas, but in only 2 (6%) of 32 RER- gastric carcinomas. These frameshift mutations cause premature stop codons downstream that are predicted to abolish normal protein function. Our results and those of others suggest that DNA mismatch repair genes, such as hMSH3 and hMSH6, are targets for the mutagenic activity of upstream mismatch repair gene mutations and that this enhanced genomic instability may accelerate the accumulation of mutations in RER+ tumors.
9452022	Low basal transcripts of the COL2A1 collagen gene from lymphoblasts show alternative splicing of exon 12 in the Kniest form of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia.
9452040	Novel nonsense mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene in one Jewish family.
9452048	Identification of three novel mutations in the CFTR gene, R117P, deltaD192, and 3121-1G-->A in four French patients.
9452051	The molecular basis of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency in French families; report of two novel mutations.
9452055	De novo mutation of the myelin Po gene in Djrine-Sottas disease (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type III): two amino acid insertion after Asp 118.
9452089	3' Acceptor splice site mutation in intron 50 leads to mild Duchenne muscular dystrophy phenotype.
9452104	Identification of four novel mutations in the factor VIII gene: three missense mutations (E1875G, G2088S, I2185T) and a 2-bp deletion (1780delTC).
9633815	Spectrum of mutations in the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene of tyrosinemia type 1 patients in northwestern Europe and Mediterranean countries. Hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT1) is a rare metabolic disease caused by a deficient activity of the enzyme fumarylacetoacetase (FAH). To investigate the molecular heterogeneity of tyrosinemia, the geographic distribution and the genotype-phenotype relationship, we have analyzed the FAH genotype of 25 HT1 patients. Mutation screening was performed by PCR amplification of exons 1-14 of the FAH gene, followed by SSCP analysis and direct sequencing of the amplified exons. Fourteen different mutations were found, of which seven were novel, viz. three missense mutations (G158D, P261L, F405H), a deletion of three nucleotides causing a deletion of serine (DEL366S) and three splice site mutations: IVS2+1(g-t), IVS6-1(g-c), IVS8-1(g-c). The splice site mutations IVS6-1(g-t) and IVS12+5(g-a) were frequently found in countries around the Mediterranean and northwestern Europe, respectively. No clear correlation between the genotype and the three major HT1 subtypes could be established.
9792408	A frequent TG deletion near the polyadenylation signal of the human HEXB gene: occurrence of an irregular DNA structure and conserved nucleotide sequence motif in the 3' untranslated region. While screening for new mutations in the HEXB gene, which encodes the beta-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase, a TG deletion (deltaTG) was found in the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of the gene, 7 bp upstream from the polyadenylation signal. Examination of DNA samples of 145 unrelated Argentinean individuals from different racial backgrounds showed that the deltaTG allele was present with a frequency of approximately 0.1, compared with the wild-type (WT) allele. The deletion was not associated with infantile or variant forms of Sandhoff disease when present in combination with a deleterious allele. Total Hex and Hex B enzymatic activities measured in individuals heterozygous for deltaTG and a null allele, IVS-2 + 1G-->A (G-->A), were approximately 30% lower than the activities of G-->A/WT individuals. Analysis of the HEXB mRNA from leukocytes of deltaTG/WT individuals by RT-PCR of the 3'UTR showed that the deltaTG allele is present at lower level than the WT allele. By polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, it was determined that a PCR fragment containing the +TG version of the 3'UTR of the HEXB gene had an irregular structure. On inspection of genes containing a TG dinucleotide upstream from the polyadenylation signal we found that this dinucleotide was part of a conserved sequence (TGTTTT) immersed in a A/T-rich region. This sequence arrangement was present in more than 40% analyzed eukaryotic mRNAs, including in the human, mouse and cat HEXB genes. The significance of the TG deletion in reference to Sandhoff disease as well as the possible functional role of the consensus sequence and the DNA structure of the 3'UTR are considered.
9829906	Spectrum of mutations and sequence variants in the FALDH gene in patients with Sjgren-Larsson syndrome. The gene encoding the human fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH) is located on 17p11.2, causing Sjgren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) when mutated. SLS is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a combination of mental retardation, congenital ichthyosis, and spastic di- or tetraplegia. We report here on studies of 16 SLS families from Europe and the Middle East, which resulted in identification of 11 different mutations. The spectrum of mutations characterized in the present study are five nucleotide substitutions resulting in amino acid changes, five frameshift mutations introducing a stop codon, and one in-frame deletion with insertion at the same position. We also observed silent sequence variants in the FALDH gene and a base pair substitution in exon 5 that alters aspartic acid to asparagine, all of which are considered polymorphisms.
10090486	Beta-thalassemia in the German population: mediterranean, Asian and novel mutations. Mutations in brief no.228. Online. The beta-thalassemia mutations of 13 unrelated heterozygous Germans who remained unidentified in a previous study of 40 subjects were investigated at the DNA level. Two Mediterranean, one Asian and three novel mutations (CD6 -G, CDs 108 /112-12nt, CDs 130/131 + GCCT) were identified. Altogether, in 30 of the 35 subjects (86%) in which a mutation in the beta-globin gene was identified, the mutation was of Mediterranean origin. The geographical distribution suggests recent migration from the Mediterranean region as cause of the high proportion of frequent Mediterranean beta-thalassemia mutations in the German population. Our results support the notion that the majority of beta-thalassemia genes in the western and central European population are of Mediterranean origin.
10094553	Identification of twenty-one new mutations in the factor IX gene by SSCP analysis. In this study we have analyzed the factor IX gene from 84 hemophilia B patients of Spanish origin. It included single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of all functional regions of the gene and further sequencing of all fragments showing abnormal migration. In 76 patients (90.4%), it was possible to identify molecular alterations leading to the appearance of the disease. Twenty-one new mutations were identified, including 13 missense mutations, two nonsense mutations, three splice-site mutations, one frameshift deletion, one frameshift insertion, and one non-frameshift deletion. The approach appears to be very suitable for molecular diagnosis of hemophilia B.
10094554	A simple multiplex FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF PCR assay convenient for wide screening programs. FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF are folate-sensitive fragile sites originally discovered in patients with X-linked mental retardation. The FMR1 gene, whose first exon includes the FRAXA site on Xq27.3, accounts for 15-20% of all X-linked forms of mental retardation. Loss of expression of FMR2, a gene adjacent to the FRAXE site on Xq28, is correlated with FRAXE expansion in some mild mentally retarded patients. FRAXF is a fragile site whose expression has not been associated with any pathological phenotype. The fragility in all three sites is caused by expansions of CGG repeats adjacent to hypermethylated CpG islands. The prevalence of FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF remains uncertain because of the lack of a simple and cost-effective test allowing wide screening programs. For the same reason, the real phenotype-genotype correlations in FRAXE and FRAXF are uncertain as well. We have developed a rapid multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay in which hypermethylated CpG islands adjacent to FRAXA, FRAXE, and FRAXF are displayed. The test is very simple and cost-effective, requires only 30 microl of peripheral blood, and can be used for performing diagnoses, postnatal and prenatal, and for screening large groups of control and mentally retarded males and newborn boys.
10094560	Characterization of eleven novel mutations (M45L, R119H, 544delG, G145V, H154Y, C184Y, D289V, 862+5A, 1172delC, R411X, E459K) in the tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene in patients with severe hypophosphatasia. Mutations in brief no. 217. Online. Hypophosphatasia is a rare inherited disorder characterized by defective bone mineralization and deficiency of serum and tissue liver/ bone/kidney tissue alkaline phosphatase (L/B/K ALP) activity. We report the characterization of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene mutations in a series of 9 families affected by severe hypophosphatasia. Fourteen distinct mutations were found, 3 of which were previously reported in the North American or Japanese populations. Seven of the 11 new mutations were missense mutations (M45L, R119H, G145V, C184Y and H154Y, D289V, E459K), the four others were 2 single nucleotide deletions (544delG and 1172delC), a mutation affecting donor splice site (862 + 5A) and a nonsense mutation (R411X).
10338100	A single, large deletion accounts for all the beta-globin gene mutations in twenty families from Sabah (North Borneo), Malaysia. Mutation in brief no. 240. Online. Beta-thalassemia major is one of the commonest genetic disorders in South-East Asia. The spectrum of beta-thalassemia mutations in the various ethnic sub-populations on the island of Borneo is unknown. We studied 20 Dusun children from the East Malaysian state of Sabah (North Borneo) with a severe beta-thalassemia major phenotype, using a combination of Southern analysis, polymerase chain reaction analysis and direct sequencing. We found the children to be homozygous for a large deletion, which has a 5' breakpoint at position -4279 from the cap site of the beta-globin gene (HBB) with the 3' breakpoint located in a L1 family of repetitive sequences at an unknown distance from the beta-globin gene. This was similar to a recent finding of a large deletion causing beta-thalassemia first described in unrelated beta-thalassemia heterozygotes of Filipino descent. This report describes the first 20 families with homozygosity of the deletion causing a severe phenotype. It provides the first information on the molecular epidemiology of beta-thalassemia in Sabah. This finding has implications for the population genetics and preventative strategies for beta-thalassemia major for nearly 300 million individuals in South-East Asia.
10408772	Insertion of Alu element responsible for acute intermittent porphyria. In this study, we report a large Finnish family in which an Alu element interferes with the coding region of the porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) gene resulting in acute intermittent porphyria (AIP). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of exon 5 among patients showed an abnormal band around 350 bp apart from the normal bands. Subcloning and sequencing of the fragment revealed a 333-bp Alu sequence that was directly inserted into exon 5 in antisense orientation. The junction sequences included a 13-bp target site duplication. This Alu cassette belongs to a Ya5 subfamily, one of the youngest and currently most active Alu subfamilies in evolution. The Alu insertion resulted in a dramatically decreased steady-state level of the allelic transcript, as this Alu sequence could not be demonstrated by direct sequencing of the amplified cDNA synthesized from total RNA extracted from the patients' lymphoblast cell lines. A stop codon present in the reading frame causes premature termination of PBGD synthesis. The predicted polypeptide contains 64 of the 361 amino acids of PBGD, followed by 13 amino acids that are not identical to the PBGD polypeptide. To further characterize the consequences of the insertion, the Alu sequence was inserted into exon 5 of the PBGD cDNA and expressed in the eukaryotic COS-1 cell line. The mutated construct expressed no enzyme activity comparable to that of the wild-type PBGD; furthermore, no mutant protein could be detected by Western blot analysis.
10408782	Molecular characterization of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Chile. Mutations in brief no. 243. Online. Both the haplotype distribution and the mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has been defined for the Chilean phenylketonuria (PKU) population. Mutation analysis was performed using a combined approach of screening for common European and Oriental mutations and application of the DGGE scanning method in the remaining uncharacterized alleles. A total of 16 different mutations have been identified, including two novel ones, Q232X and IVS11nt5. The most frequent mutations were IVS10nt-11 and V388M present both in the 13% of the mutant chromosomes. The rest of the mutations are rare. The haplotype association including VNTR and STR alleles, was examined to investigated the origin and distribution of PAH alleles in Chile. Our results are consistent with Southern Europeans as the major source of PAH mutations in Latin America. However, we have also detected mutations from East and Central Europe, such IVS12nt1, R408W and R252W. It is clear that the PKU mutation present in each Latin American country varies with the demographic profile and specific mutation scanning is necessary in each population both for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. The correlation between the genotypes and the phenotypes is consistent with the emerging pattern of mutation severity deduced from previous studies in related populations.
10477429	TP53 mutation and haplotype analysis of two large African American families. Two large apparently unrelated African American families with a high incidence of breast cancer and other tumors characteristic of Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome were studied. Mutation screening revealed that in both families the affected members carried a germline mutation of the TP53 gene at codon 133 (ATG--> ACG, M133T). In order to determine whether an ancestral haplotype was shared by these two families, polymorphic markers within and flanking the TP53 gene were studied. Haplotype analysis using five markers revealed an identical haplotype shared by the two families. Loss of heterozygosity at the TP53 locus in the probands' tumor tissues from each family was observed; in each case, the retained allele carried the common haplotype. The frequency of this haplotype in the general African American population is <0.003. This unique haplotype, combined with the rare TP53 mutation, suggests that these African American families share a common ancestry. This finding suggests that other African Americans may be carriers of this mutation and thus may be at risk of early-onset breast cancer or other cancers characteristic of the Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome. The finding of recurring mutations in African Americans may facilitate carrier screening and identification in this population.
10477438	Racial differences in the frequencies of cardiac beta(1)-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms: analysis of c145A>G and c1165G>C.
10533067	Analysis of both TSC1 and TSC2 for germline mutations in 126 unrelated patients with tuberous sclerosis. Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the development of multiple hamartomas involving many organs. About two-thirds of the cases are sporadic and appear to represent new mutations. With the cloning of two causative genes, TSC1 and TSC2 it is now possible to analyze both genes in TSC patients and identify germline mutations. Here we report the mutational analysis of the entire coding region of both TSC1 and TSC2 genes in 126 unrelated TSC patients, including 40 familial and 86 sporadic cases, by single-stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis followed by direct sequencing. Mutations were identified in a total of 74 (59%) cases, including 16 TSC1 mutations (5 sporadic and 11 familial cases) and 58 TSC2 mutations (42 sporadic and 16 familial cases). Overall, significantly more TSC2 mutations were found in our population, with a relatively equal distribution of mutations between TSC1 and TSC2 among the familial cases, but a marked underrepresentation of TSC1 mutations among the sporadic cases (P = 0.0035, Fisher's exact test). All TSC1 mutations were predicted to be protein truncating. However, in TSC2 13 missense mutations were found, five clustering in the GAP-related domain and three others occurring in exon 16. Upon comparison of clinical manifestations, including the incidence of intellectual disability, we could not find any observable differences between TSC1 and TSC2 patients. Our data help define the distribution and spectrum of mutations associated with the TSC loci and will be useful for both understanding the function of these genes as well as genetic counseling in patients with the disease.
10649495	Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations in patients with type 2 Gaucher disease. Gaucher disease, the most common lysosomal storage disorder, results from the inherited deficiency of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase. Three clinical types are recognized: type 1, non-neuronopathic; type 2, acute neuronopathic; and type 3, subacute neuronopathic. Type 2 Gaucher disease, the rarest type, is progressive and fatal. We have performed molecular analyses of a cohort of 31 patients with type 2 Gaucher disease. The cases studied included fetuses presenting prenatally with hydrops fetalis, infants with the collodion baby phenotype, and infants diagnosed after several months of life. All 62 mutant glucocerebrosidase (GBA) alleles were identified. Thirty-three different mutant alleles were found, including point mutations, splice junction mutations, deletions, fusion alleles and recombinant alleles. Eleven novel mutations were identified in these patients: R131L, H255Q, R285H, S196P, H311R, c.330delA, V398F, F259L, c.533delC, Y304C and A190E. Mutation L444P was found on 25 patient alleles. Southern blots and direct sequencing demonstrated that mutation L444P occurred alone on 9 alleles, with E326K on one allele and as part of a recombinant allele on 15 alleles. There were no homozygotes for point mutation L444P. The recombinant alleles that included L444P resulted from either reciprocal recombination or gene conversion with the nearby glucocerebrosidase pseudogene, and seven different sites of recombination were identified. Homozygosity for a recombinant allele was associated with early lethality. We have also summarized the literature describing mutations associated with type 2 disease, and list 50 different mutations. This report constitutes the most comprehensive molecular study to date of type 2 Gaucher disease, and it demonstrates that there is significant phenotypic and genotypic heterogeneity among patients with type 2 Gaucher disease. Hum Mutat 15:181-188, 2000. Published 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
10737991	Identification of fifteen novel PHEX gene mutations in Finnish patients with hypophosphatemic rickets. We have carried out a mutation screening of the PHEX gene in Finnish patients with hypophosphatemia. A total of 100% (5/5) of the familial HYP patients (X-linked hypophosphatemia) and 93% (14/15) of the sporadic cases were found to carry a mutation in the PHEX gene. We identified 18 mutations, of which 15 were novel. We report also a new polymorphism 46bp upstream of exon 16. Two families were segregating the same nonsense mutation in exon 1 (R20X), but since this mutation has been previously reported in three independent studies, we consider it to be a mutational hotspot rather than a Finnish founder mutation. We did not find PHEX gene mutations in two additional hypophosphatemia families in which the mode of inheritance was other than X-linked dominant. Also, no mutation could be detected in a patient with suspected oncogenic osteomalacia (OHO).
10738001	A novel polymorphism (219G>A) in the transferrin receptor gene.
10738004	A novel mutation (Q239R) identified in a Taiwan Chinese patient with type VI mucopolysaccharidosis (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome).
10790217	Detection of point mutations of BCL10 gene in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues: report of 46 cases. BCL10 was found to have truncated mutations at a high frequency in MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) B cell lymphomas. We examined the mutations of BCL10 gene in human primary liver cancer using non-isotopic PCR-SSCP. Three exons were examined in both cancer and non-HCC adjacent liver tissues. For each exon, six PCR products with abnormal bands were sequenced to verify those mutations. 56.5% samples were revealed a C to G mutation at position 5744 (g5744C>G) of the first exon of BCL10 gene; 54.3% samples were revealed a T deletion mutation at position 11311 (g11311delT) of the second exon of BCL10 gene; 45.7% samples were revealed a C to T mutation at position 14116 (g14116C>T) of the third exon of BCL10 gene. Similar mutation types were found in tumor-adjacent tissues at a lower frequency. The single base changes result in a truncated BCL10 protein expression. Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level, the tumor size had no significant relationship with BCL10 mutation.
10790218	Analysis of the human KCNH2(HERG) gene: identification and characterization of a novel mutation Y667X associated with long QT syndrome and a non-pathological 9 bp insertion. Long QT (LQT) syndrome is a potentially life-threatening disorder, characterized by a distinct cardiac arrhythmia known as torsades de pointes. Mutations within a number of genes linked to the familial form, including that coding for a cardiac potassium channel called KCNH2 (HERG), have been described based on the characterized genomic organization. A standardized method was developed to screen the entire gene for gene variants. We report a single base pair substitution, introducing a premature STOP codon at codon 667 of the gene in a healthy individual with an extended QTc interval (460 msec). In vitro expression of the codon Y667X variant in Xenopus oocyte suggests that the autosomal dominant variant does not function in a dominant/negative manner and cannot co-assemble to form a channel, resulting in a reduction of the KCNH2 current, and an extension of the QT interval. This indicates that pathogenic LQT gene variants exist in the apparently normal population, the prognosis and clinical consequences of which remain to be determined. The assays described should facilitate future studies into this area.
10862097	Identification of 3 novel mutations (Y4236X, Q3820X, 11745+2 ins3) in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease 1 gene (PKD1).
10874330	A novel mutation (1320InsT) identified in two Argentine families with variegate porphyria.
11058905	Six novel MEN1 gene mutations in sporadic parathyroid tumors. We report nine mutations of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) gene in sporadic parathyroid adenomas. Six of them have not previously been described: E60X, P32R, 261delA, 934+2T-->G, S443P, and 1593insC. The tissue samples were initially submitted to LOH analysis at 11q13 followed by SSCP screening of LOH-positive samples. Mutations were identified by direct sequencing and subcloning. Three (E60X, P32R, and 261delA) were in exon 2, one (934+2bp) in the splice junction of exon 5, one (S443P) in exon 9, and one (1593insC) in exon 10. The 3 mutations in exon 2 were associated with loss and/or creation of a restriction site. The corresponding germline sequence of the MEN1 gene was normal. Most mutations would likely result in a nonfunctional menin protein, and therefore in the loss of a tumor suppressor protein.
11102997	A de novo adrenoleukodystrophy gene (ABCD1) mutation S636I without detectable ABCD1 protein and a R104C mutation with normal amounts of protein from an Austrian patient collective.
11139239	Jagged1 mutations in alagille syndrome. We have summarized data on 233 Alagille syndrome patients reported with mutations in Jagged1 (JAG1). This data has been published by seven different laboratories in Europe, the United States, Australia, and Japan. Mutations have been demonstrated in 60-75% of patients with a clinically confirmed diagnosis of Alagille syndrome. Total gene deletions have been reported in 3-7% of patients, and the remainder have intragenic mutations. Seventy two percent (168/233) of the reported mutations lead to frameshifts that cause a premature termination codon. These mutations will either lead to a prematurely truncated protein, or alternatively, nonsense mediated decay might lead to lack of a product from that allele. Twenty three unique missense mutations were identified (13% of mutations). These were clustered in conserved regions at the 5' end of the gene, or in the EGF repeats. Splicing consensus sequence changes were identified in 15% of patients. A high frequency of de novo mutations (60-70%) has been reported. The spectrum of mutations identified is consistent with haploinsufficiency for JAG1 being a mechanism for Alagille syndrome.
11139269	A novel polymorphism (-88 C>A) in the 5' UTR of the p53R2 gene.
11180609	Three novel mutations (P760L, L1305P, Q1351Stop) causing Wilson disease.
11295840	Identification of a novel de novo mutation (G373D) in the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA) in a patient affected with Fabry disease.
11317353	Variable expressivity and mutation databases: The androgen receptor gene mutations database. For over 50 years genetics has presumed that variations in phenotypic expression have, for the most part, been the result of alterations in genotype. The importance and value of mutation databases has been based on the premise that the same gene or allelic variation in a specific gene that has been proven to determine a specific phenotype, will always produce the same phenotype. However, recent evidence has shown that so called "simple" Mendelian disorders or monogenic traits are often far from simple, exhibiting phenotypic variation (variable expressivity) that cannot be explained solely by a gene or allelic alteration. The AR gene mutations database now lists 25 cases where different degrees of androgen insensitivity are caused by identical mutations in the androgen receptor gene. In five of these cases the phenotypic variability is due to somatic mosaicism, that is, somatic mutations that occur in only certain cells of androgen-sensitive tissue. Recently, a number of other cases of variable expressivity have also been linked to somatic mosaicism. The impact of variable expressivity due to somatic mutations and mosaicism on mutation databases is discussed. In particular, the effect of an organism exhibiting genetic heterogeneity within its tissues, and the possibility of an organism's genotype changing over its lifetime, are considered to have important implications for mutation databases in the future.
11385711	The R71G BRCA1 is a founder Spanish mutation and leads to aberrant splicing of the transcript. In a BRCA1 screening in familial breast cancer carried out in different centres in Spain, France, and United Kingdom, a missense mutation 330A>G which results in a Arg to Gly change at codon 71 (R71G) was independently identified in 6 families, all of them with Spanish ancestors. This residue coincides with the -2 position of the exon 5 donor splice site. We further investigated the effect of this base substitution on the splicing of BRCA1 mRNA. The sequence analysis of the cDNA indicated that 22 bp of exon 5 were deleted, creating with the first bases of exon 6 a termination codon at position 64, which results in a truncated protein. The BRCA1 haplotype of the R71G carrier patients and Spanish controls was analysed by use of six microsatellites located within or near BRCA1. Our results are consistent with the possibility that these families shared a common ancestry with BRCA1 R71G being a founder mutation of Spanish origin.
11438995	Biosensor technology for real-time detection of the cystic fibrosis W1282X mutation in CFTR. In the present paper, biospecific interaction analysis (BIA) was performed using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and biosensor technologies to detect the Trp1282Ter mutation (W1282X) of the cystic fibrosis (CF) transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. We first immobilized on a SA5 sensor chip a single-stranded biotinylated oligonucleotide containing the sequence involved in this mutation, and the efficiency of hybridization of oligonucleotide probes differing in length was determined. Second, we immobilized on different SA5 sensor chips biotinylated polymerase-chain reaction (PCR) products from a normal subject as well as from heterozygous and homozygous W1282X samples. The results obtained show that both allele-specific 10- and 12-mer oligonucleotides are suitable probes to detect W1282X mutations of the cystic fibrosis gene under standard BIA experimental conditions. During the association phase performed at 25 degrees C, discrimination between mismatched and full matched hybrids was readily and reproducibly observed by using the 10-mer W1282X probes. By contrast, when the 12-mer DNA probes were employed, discrimination between mismatched and full matched hybrids was observed during the dissociation phase. Taken together, the results presented suggest that BIA is an easy, speedy, and automatable approach to detect point mutations leading to cystic fibrosis. By this procedure, it is possible to perform real-time monitoring of hybridization between target single stranded PCR products obtained by using as substrates DNA isolated from normal or heterozygous subjects, and homozygous W1282X CF samples and oligonucleotide probes, therefore enabling a one-step, non-radioactive protocol to perform diagnosis.
11524732	High incidence of N and K-Ras activating mutations in multiple myeloma and primary plasma cell leukemia at diagnosis. Using allele-specific amplification method (ARMS), a highly sensitive one-stage allele-specific PCR, we have evaluated the incidence of NRAS and KRAS2 activating mutations (codons 12, 13, and 61) in 62 patients with either monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) or multiple myeloma (MM), primary plasma-cell leukemia (P-PCL), and also in human myeloma cell lines (HMCL). NRAS and/or KRAS2 mutations were found in 54.5% of MM at diagnosis (but in 81% at the time of relapse), in 50% of P-PCL, and in 50% of 16 HMCL. In contrast, the occurrence of such mutations was very low in MGUS and indolent MM (12.50%). Of note, KRAS2 mutations were always more frequent than NRAS. The validity of the technique was assessed by direct sequencing of cell lines and of some patients. Multiple mutations found in two patients were confirmed by subcloning exon PCR amplification products, testing clones with our method, and sequencing them. Thus, these early mutations could play a major role in the oncogenesis of MM and P-PCL.
11524734	Identification of seven novel mutations including the first two genomic rearrangements in SLC26A3 mutated in congenital chloride diarrhea. Congenital chloride diarrhea (CLD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by defective intestinal electrolyte absorption, resulting in voluminous osmotic diarrhea with high chloride content. A variety of mutations in the solute carrier family 26, member 3 gene (SLC26A3, previously known as CLD or DRA) are responsible for the disease. Since the identification of the SLC26A3 gene and the determination of its genomic structure, altogether three founder and 17 private mutations have been characterized within miscellaneous ethnic groups. We screened for mutations in seven unrelated families with CLD. The diagnoses were confirmed by fecal chloride measurements. The combined PCR-SSCP and sequencing analyses revealed altogether seven novel mutations including two missense mutations (S206P, D468V), two splicing defects (IVS12-1G>C, IVS13-2delA), one nonsense mutation (Q436X), one insertion/deletion mutation (2104-2105delGGins29-bp), and an intragenic deletion of SLC26A3 exons 7 and 8. Two previously identified mutations were also found. This is the first report of rearrangement mutations in SLC26A3. Molecular features predisposing SLC26A3 for the two rearrangements may include repetitive elements and palindromic-like sequences. The increasingly wide diversity of SLC26A3 mutations suggests that mutations in the SLC26A3 gene may not be rare events.
11668643	Seven novel mutations in the ORNT1 gene (SLC25A15) in patients with hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, and homocitrullinuria syndrome. Eight unrelated Italian patients with the hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, and homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome were analyzed for mutations in the ORNT1 gene. Seven novel mutations were identified (Q89X, G27R, G190D, R275Q, c.861insG, c.164insA, and IVS5+1G-->A). Other previously described variants were a heterozygous deletion of a phenylalanine residue (F188del) in one allele and the R179X in two. The G27R mutation was carried by two patients. Analyses of ORNT1 mRNA in four patients showed that mutant alleles were stable and of the predicted size. The current study expands the spectrum of mutations in ORNT1 gene.
11793474	Integrating mutation data and structural analysis of the TP53 tumor-suppressor protein. TP53 encodes p53, which is a nuclear phosphoprotein with cancer-inhibiting properties. In response to DNA damage, p53 is activated and mediates a set of antiproliferative responses including cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Mutations in the TP53 gene are associated with more than 50% of human cancers, and 90% of these affect p53-DNA interactions, resulting in a partial or complete loss of transactivation functions. These mutations affect the structural integrity and/or p53-DNA interactions, leading to the partial or complete loss of the protein's function. We report here the results of a systematic automated analysis of the effects of p53 mutations on the structure of the core domain of the protein. We found that 304 of the 882 (34.4%) distinct mutations reported in the core domain can be explained in structural terms by their predicted effects on protein folding or on protein-DNA contacts. The proportion of "explained" mutations increased to 55.6% when substitutions of evolutionary conserved amino acids were included. The automated method of structural analysis developed here may be applied to other frequently mutated gene mutations such as dystrophin, BRCA1, and G6PD.
11793480	BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in Russian familial breast cancer. We have screened index cases from 25 Russian breast/ovarian cancer families for germ-line mutations in all coding exons of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, using multiplex heteroduplex analysis. In addition we tested 22 patients with breast cancer diagnosed before age 40 without family history and 6 patients with bilateral breast cancer. The frequency of families with germline mutations in BRCA was 16% (4/25). One BRCA1 mutation, 5382insC, was found in three families. The results of present study, and those of a separate study of 19 breast-ovarian cancer families, suggest that BRCA1 5382insC is a founder mutation in the Russian population. Three BRCA2 mutations were found in patients with breast cancer without family history: two in young patients and one in patients with bilateral breast cancer. Four novel BRCA2 mutations were identified: three frameshift (695insT, 1528del4, 9318del4) and one nonsense (S1099X).
11968082	GeneTests-GeneClinics: genetic testing information for a growing audience. The development and usage of two companion NIH-funded genetic testing information databases, GeneTests (www.genetests.org) and GeneClinics (www.geneclinics.org), now merged into one web site, reflect the steadily increasing use of genetic testing and the expanding audience for genetic testing information. Established in 1993 as Helix, a genetics laboratory directory of approximately 110 listings, GeneTests has grown into a database of over 900 tests for inherited diseases, a directory of over 500 international laboratories, a directory of over 1,000 U.S. and international genetics clinics, and a resource for educational/teaching materials and reports of summary genetic test data. GeneClinics, founded in 1997 as an expert-authored, peer-reviewed, disease-specific knowledge base relating genetic testing to patient care, has grown steadily, now containing over 130 expert-authored, peer-reviewed full-text entries relating genetic testing information to diagnosis, management, and genetic counseling of specific inherited diseases. In spring 2001 the two databases were merged and in October 2001 the two web sites were merged for the purpose of seamless navigation into the GeneTests-GeneClinics site (www.genetests.org or www.geneclinics.org); the GeneClinics knowledge base was renamed "GeneReviews" to avoid confusion with the U.S. and international clinic directories. As genetic testing has moved steadily out of research venues and into routine medical practice, the user audience for these databases has become international and expansive and includes healthcare providers, patients, educators, policy makers, and the media. The use of these combined resources has grown to approximately 3,200 visits/day.
11968091	GJB2 mutations in Iranians with autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss. Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is an extremely common disorder. About 70% of HHL is non-syndromic, with autosomal recessive forms accounting for approximately 85% of the genetic load. Although very heterogeneous, the most common cause of HHL in many different world populations is mutations of GJB2, a gene that encodes the gap junction protein connexin 26 (Cx26). This study investigates the contribution of GJB2 to the autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD) load in the Iranian population. One hundred sixty eight persons from 83 families were studied. GJB2-related deafness was diagnosed in 9 families (4, 35delG homozygotes; 3, 35delG compound heterozygotes; 1, W24X homozygote; 1, non-35delG compound heterozygote). The carrier frequency of the 35delG allele in this population was approximately 1% (1/83). Because the relative frequency of Cx26 mutations is much less than in the other populations, it is possible that mutations in other genes play a major role in ARNSD in Iran.
12204007	Identification of mutations of Bruton's tyrosine kinase gene (BTK) in Brazilian patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia. Mutations in the Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) gene are responsible for X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), which is characterized by recurrent bacterial infections, profound hypogammaglobulinemia, and decreased numbers of mature B cells in the peripheral blood. We evaluated 17 male Brazilian patients from 13 unrelated families who showed markedly reduced numbers of blood B cells and hypogammaglobulinemia. BTK gene analysis detected mutations in 10 of the 13 presumed XLA families. Seven mutations (Q196X, G613D, R28L, 251-273del, Q234X, H364P, and R13X) had been reported previously, whereas the remaining three mutations (M501T, IVS15+1G>C, and IVS14+1G>A) were novel. Mutation IVS15+1G>C occurred in a splice donor site and caused exons 15 and 16 to be skipped, and IVS14+1G>A might cause exon 14 to be skipped. Flow cytometry revealed deficient expression of BTK protein in 10 of the 13 families. This is the first report of the diagnosis of XLA by analysis of mutations of the BTK gene in Brazilian patients.
12325018	rSNP_Guide: an integrated database-tools system for studying SNPs and site-directed mutations in transcription factor binding sites. Since the human genome was sequenced in draft, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis has become one of the keynote fields of bioinformatics. We have developed an integrated database-tools system, rSNP_Guide (http://wwwmgs.bionet.nsc.ru/mgs/systems/rsnp/), devoted to prediction of transcription factor (TF) binding sites, alterations of which could be associated with disease phenotype. By inputting data on alterations in DNA sequence and in DNA binding pattern of an unknown TF, rSNP_Guide searches for a known TF with alterations in the recognition score calculated on the basis of TF site's sequence and consistent with the input alterations in DNA binding to the unknown TF. Our system has been tested on many relationships between known TF sites and diseases, as well as on site-directed mutagenesis data. Experimental verification of rSNP_Guide system was made on functionally important SNPs in human TDO2and mouse K-ras genes. Additional examples of analysis are reported involving variants in the human gammaA-globin (HBG1), hsp70(HSPA1A), and Factor IX (F9) gene promoters.
12402331	Novel PEX1 mutations and genotype-phenotype correlations in Australasian peroxisome biogenesis disorder patients. The peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) are a group of neuronal migration/neurodegenerative disorders that arise from defects in PEX genes. A major subgroup of the PBDs includes Zellweger syndrome (ZS), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), and infantile Refsum disease (IRD). These three disorders represent a clinical continuum with Zellweger syndrome the most severe. Mutations in the PEX1 gene, which encodes a protein of the AAA ATPase family involved in peroxisome matrix protein import, account for the genetic defect in more than half of the patients in this PBD subgroup. We report here on the results of PEX1 mutation detection in an Australasian cohort of PEX1-deficient PBD patients. This screen has identified five novel mutations, including nonsense mutations in exons 14 and 19 and single nucleotide deletions in exons 5 and 18. Significantly, the allele carrying the exon 18 frameshift mutation is present at moderately high frequency (approx. 10%) in this patient cohort. The fifth mutation is a missense mutation (R798G) that attenuates, but does not abolish PEX1 function. We have evaluated the cellular impact of these novel mutations, along with that of the two most common PEX1 mutations (c.2097-2098insT and G843D), in PBD patients by determining the levels of PEX1 mRNA, PEX1 protein, and peroxisome protein import. The findings are consistent with a close correlation between cellular phenotype, disease severity, and PEX1 genotype.
12402345	Molecular studies in mutase-deficient (MUT) methylmalonic aciduria: identification of five novel mutations. Mutase-deficient (MUT) methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of organic acid metabolism, resulting from a functional defect in the nuclear encoded mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM) (EC.5.4.99.2). The enzyme requires 5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin as a cofactor. Isolated MMA results from either apoenzyme or cofactor defects, and is classified into several genotypic classes and complementation groups. These are designated mut(-) or mut(0) (together termed mut), depending on minimal or no apoenzyme activity respectively and cobalamin A or B (cbl A/B) for cofactor defects. To date various studies have identified over 53 disease-causing mutations from patients with mut(0/-) MMA. These are predominantly missense/nonsense nucleotide substitutions. In this study, we report the genotype analysis on 7 patients diagnosed with mut MMA. Five novel mutations were identified (R403stop, 497delG, P615T, 208delG and R467stop) and one novel polymorphism (c712A->G). The previously reported R228Q mutation was found in one patient, who is a compound heterozygote for this mutation and the R467stop mutation. A recently reported N219Y mutation was found in one patient. The 497delG mutation was detected as a homozygous deletion. The remaining mutations were observed in compound heterozygotes, with the second mutation yet to be identified. Many of the unidentified mutations may occur within the promotor or intronic regions.
12442272	D90A-SOD1 mediated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a single founder for all cases with evidence for a Cis-acting disease modifier in the recessive haplotype. More than 100 different heterozygous mutations in copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) have been found in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease. Uniquely, D90A-SOD1 has been identified in recessive, dominant and apparently sporadic pedigrees. The phenotype of homozygotes is stereotyped with an extended survival, whereas that of affected heterozygotes varies. The frequency of D90A-SOD1 is 50 times higher in Scandinavia (2.5%) than elsewhere, though ALS prevalence is not raised there. Our earlier study indicated separate founders for recessive and dominant/sporadic ALS and we proposed a disease-modifying factor linked to the recessive mutation. Here we have doubled our sample set and employed novel markers to characterise the mutation's origin and localise any modifying factor. Linkage disequilibrium analysis indicates that D90A homozygotes and heterozygotes share a rare haplotype and are all descended from a single ancient founder (alpha 0.974) c.895 generations ago. Homozygotes arose subsequently only c.63 generations ago (alpha 0.878). Recombination has reduced the region shared by recessive kindreds to 97-265 kb around SOD1, excluding all neighbouring genes. We propose that a cis-acting regulatory polymorphism has arisen close to D90A-SOD1 in the recessive founder, which decreases ALS susceptibility in heterozygotes and slows disease progression.
12442283	Novel mutations in the MYOC/GLC1A gene in a large group of glaucoma patients. Mutations at the myocilin (MYOC) gene within the GLC1A locus have been revealed in 2-4% of patients suffering primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) worldwide. In our ongoing glaucoma study six hundred eighty two persons have been screened for MYOC mutations. The first group consisted of 453 patients from a long-term clinical study diagnosed either with juvenile OAG (JOAG), POAG, ocular hypertension (OHT) or normal tension glaucoma (NTG) plus 22 cases of secondary glaucoma. This group, and additional 83 healthy controls, is part of a long term study with repeated clinical examinations at the University of Erlangen-Nurnberg. An additional sample of 124 glaucoma patients or at risk persons referred from other sources were included in the mutation screening. Five novel mutations, namely Gly434Ser, Asn450Asp, Val251Ala, Ile345Met and Ser393Asn, could be identified as cause of preperimetric POAG, JOAG, normal tension POAG and POAG. Myocilin mutations were identified similar with previous reports with other ethnic populations at the rate of 11/341 (3.2%) probands.
12497643	Splice mutations in the p53 gene: case report and review of the literature. Splice mutations in the p53 gene (TP53) are described as rare events that occur at a frequency of less than 1%. Using a functional assay based on the transcriptional activity of p53 and using RNA as starting material, we describe here a p53 splice mutation that could not be detected by genomic sequencing. This lack of detection is due to a deletion of the region complementary to primers commonly used for amplification. Reviewing the literature, we show that p53 splice mutations have been certainly underestimated and that careful strategy should be used for a complete mutational analysis of the p53 gene. Furthermore, some p53 gene mutations described as "neutral" due to the absence of any amino-acid change are truly deleterious, as they affect gene splicing.
12552556	Clinical and molecular study in congenital muscular dystrophy with partial laminin alpha 2 (LAMA2) deficiency. Complete laminin alpha2 (LAMA2) deficiency causes approximately half of congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD) cases. Many loss-of-function mutations have been reported in these severe, neonatal-onset patients, but only single missense mutations have been found in milder CMD with partial laminin alpha2 deficiency. Here, we studied nine patients diagnosed with CMD who showed abnormal white-matter signal at brain MRI and partial deficiency of laminin alpha2 on immunofluorescence of muscle biopsy. We screened the entire 9.5 kb laminin alpha2 mRNA from patient muscle biopsy by direct capillary automated sequencing, single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP), or denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) of overlapping RT-PCR products followed by direct sequencing of heteroduplexes. We identified laminin alpha2 sequence changes in six of nine CMD patients. Each of the gene changes identified, except one, was novel, including three missense changes and two splice-site mutations. The finding of partial laminin alpha2 deficiency by immunostaining is not specific for laminin alpha2 gene mutation carriers, with only two patients (22%) showing clear causative mutations, and an additional three patients (33%) showing possible mutations. The clinical presentation and disease progression was homogeneous in the laminin alpha2-mutation positive and negative CMD patients.
12552571	Functional analysis of LKB1/STK11 mutants and two aberrant isoforms found in Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome patients. Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) is thought to be caused by mutations occurring in the widely expressed serine/threonine protein kinase named LKB1/STK11. Recent work has led to the identification of four mutants (R304W, I177N, K175-D176del, L263fsX286) and two novel aberrant LKB1/STK11 cDNA isoforms (r291-464del, r485-1283del) in a group of PJS Italian patients. Three of the four mutations only change 1 or 2 amino acids in the LKB1/STK11 catalytic domain. Here we demonstrate that all six LKB1/STK11 variants analysed are completely inactive in vitro as they were unable to autophosphorylate at Thr336, the major LKB1/STK11 autophosphorylation site, and to phosphorylate the p53 tumour suppressor protein. We also show that 5 out of the 6 variants are entirely localised in the nucleus in contrast to the wild type LKB1/STK11, which is detected in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. Finally we demonstrate that all 6 LKB1/STK11 variants, in contrast to wild type LKB1/STK11, are unable to suppress the growth of melanoma G361 cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that the LKB1 mutations investigated in this study lead to the loss of serine/threonine kinase activity and are therefore likely to be the primary cause of PJS development in the patients that they were isolated from.
12619118	Germline TP53 mutations and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. There are now reports of nearly 250 independent germline TP53 (p53) mutations in over 100 publications. Such mutations are typically associated with Li-Fraumeni or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome, although many have been identified in cohorts of patients with tumors considered to be typical of LFS. In general, the spectrum of mutations that has been detected in the germline reflects that found in tumors, although there are some notable exceptions in certain tumor types. Detailed knowledge of the pedigrees allows a comprehensive analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations and an understanding of the tumors that are associated with germline TP53 mutations. This review will discuss the spectrum of mutations and the methods for mutation detection, the tumors associated with inheritance of a germline mutation, and some of the ethical and clinical problems in patients with a germline TP53 mutation.
12655559	Gene structure of human carbamylphosphate synthetase 1 and novel mutations in patients with neonatal onset. Carbamylphosphate synthetase 1 (E.C. 6.3.4.16) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of the urea cycle that can result in severe neonatal hyperammonemia. Since the genomic structure of the CPS1 gene was not yet elucidated, mutation detection was performed by analysis of transcripts in the past. Here, we present the entire DNA sequence of the human CPS1 gene including all exon-intron boundaries. Moreover, mutation analysis was performed in six patients leading to the detection of 9 novel mutations including the missense mutations c.2528T>C and c.2623A>G, the nonsense mutations c.712C>T and c.2115ins35bp, the splice site mutations c.1263+5G>C, c.3558+1G>C and c.4101+2T>C, and a small deletion c.3036_3038delGGT. The mutations c.2528T>C and c.2623A>G were identified on a double mutated allele. New data on the genomic structure of the CPS1 gene provided in this study are useful to characterize the heterogenous molecular basis of the disease in patients deficient for carbamylphosphate 1 deficiency.
12673796	Detection of hotspot mutations and polymorphisms using an enhanced PCR-RFLP approach. Ethidium gel-based PCR-RFLP is widely used, and is perhaps the simplest method for detection of known mutations in cancer-related genes and for genotyping a wide range of other human diseases. However, its application is limited by the fact that it can only detect mutant alleles that are present in more than 5-10% of wild-type alleles. Here we present a method that allows a 1-2 order enhancement in the sensitivity of the widely used PCR-RFLP without substantially increasing the effort and cost associated with it. This method is a modification to our previously reported amplification via primer ligation at the mutation (APRIL-ATM) method, which utilizes ligation of a primer at a restriction site formed by a mutation, followed by a ligation-mediated PCR amplification which amplifies only the mutation-containing DNA molecules. By combining this method with the artificial introduction of restriction sites during PCR, we demonstrate that assays can be designed and validated for detecting hot-spot mutations in codons 273, 158, and 248 of the TP53 gene (p53) and potentially for most mutations of interest. This approach is validated by using samples where the mutation was artificially introduced at these p53 positions. The increased sensitivity offered by the method further allows us to rapidly screen for low frequency polymorphisms in pooled DNA samples. The frequency of an MSH2 missense polymorphism (965G>A) was quantified in pooled genomic DNA samples from 205 and 221 U.S. and Polish colorectal cancer patients, respectively, and an equal number of ethnicity-matched controls. The data revealed a 3-5% prevalence of this polymorphism in the patient and the control populations. Individual sequencing of all 852 patient samples demonstrated an excellent agreement among the two independent approaches. The present enhanced PCR-RFLP reduces the effort involved in high throughput polymorphism studies and promises to find applications in genotyping and association studies involving low frequency polymorphisms and mutations.
12673802	Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) due to a small duplication in the PABPN1 gene. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a late onset autosomal dominant muscle disorder. The OPMD-locus has been mapped to chromosome 14q11.2-q13. The polyadenylate binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1; PABP2) gene has been identified as the mutated gene. The mutation consists of a short meiotically stable trinucleotide repeat in the first exon of PABPN1 gene. We have investigated Dutch OPMD patients from four unrelated families and identified a new mutation in two of the four families. Instead of a repeat expansion we found a duplication in the first exon of the PABPN1 gene (c.27_28ins12, p.11_12insAAAA). The identification of this new mutation supports the theory of unequal crossing-over as molecular mechanism causing the mutation in the PABPN1 gene responsible for OPMD, and not the slippage model.
12872253	Mutation screening of the N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) in patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease. In a previous study, we have shown that N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), classified in databases as a tumor suppressor and heavy metal-response protein, is mutated in hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy Lom (HMSNL), a severe autosomal recessive form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease. The private founder mutation R148X, causing HMSNL in patients of Romani ethnicity, has so far remained the only molecular defect linking NDRG1 to a specific disease phenotype. Here we report the first study aiming to assess the overall contribution of this gene to the pathogenesis of peripheral neuropathies, in cases where the most common causes of CMT disease have been excluded. Sequence analysis of NDRG1 in 104 CMT patients of diverse ethnicity identified one novel disease-causing mutation, IVS8-1G>A (g.2290787G>A), which affects the splice-acceptor site of IVS8 and results in the skipping of exon 9. The phenotype of the IVS8-1G>A homozygote was very closely related to that of HMSNL patients. In addition, we have detected homozygosity for the known R148X mutation in two affected individuals. Mutations in NDRG1 thus accounted for 2.88% of our overall group of patients, and for 4.68% of cases with demyelinating neuropathies. No other variants were identified in the coding sequence, whereas 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms were observed in the introns. Hum Mutat 22:129-135, 2003.
12938095	Molecular analysis in Fabry disease in Spain: fifteen novel GLA mutations and identification of a homozygous female. Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA). Here we report molecular studies in 22 unrelated Spanish patients with Fabry disease ( 20 males and two females). Fifteen novel mutations were identified. In addition 7 previously described mutations and two previously reported polymorphisms were detected. The 15 novel mutations comprise: eight missense E48K (c.142G>A), W81S (c.242G>C), D170H (c.508G>C), W226C (c.678G>T), Q279R (c.836A>G), C382Y (c.1145G>A), I407K (c.1220T>A), L414S (c.1241T>C); one nonsense W95X (c.284G>A); one insertion Y216fsX15 (c.646_647insT); two small deletions G346fsX1 (c.1037delG), K426fsX23 (c.1277_1278delAA); one gross deletion comprising exons 5, 6, 7; one complex mutation (insertion and deletion) A368fsX24 (c.1102delGinsTTATAC), and one splice-site mutation IVS4+1G>A (c.639+1G>A). One of the females was found homozygous for Q279R mutation and she presented with the classic phenotype since the age of 8 years, this case extending into women the severe phenotype observed in classically affected males. Mutation analysis provided precise identification for 30 heterozygotes among female relatives and detection of a de novo mutation. The molecular studies on Spanish Fabry patients here reported further contribute to the identification of new mutations in this disease, and allow reliable detection of heterozygotes which has consequences for genetic counselling and for treatment.
14517964	BUB1 infrequently mutated in human breast carcinomas. The BUB1 gene is a key player in the mitotic spindle checkpoint machinery that monitors proper segregation of sister chromatides during mitosis. It has been suggested that mutations in BUB1 may disrupt the spindle checkpoint and thereby cause chromosomal instability, which is a hallmark of solid tumors including those from the breast. From a series of breast carcinomas we selected 20 cases with genomic instability, as scored by Comparative Genome Hybridization (CGH), and without somatic TP53 (p53) mutations, and sequenced the entire coding region of the BUB1 gene. Two different constitutional sequence variants were found; a base substitution in exon 5, c.481G>A (CAG>CAA, a synonymous change encoding Gln144) in two samples, and a base substitution 8 bp upstream of exon 10, c.1007-8T>C in two other samples. No somatic mutations were detected. These results indicate that genomic instability scored as copy number alterations by CGH in TP53 wild type breast carcinomas is not caused by somatic mutations in the BUB1 gene.
14695528	Subtelomeric deletions detected in patients with idiopathic mental retardation using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Subtelomeric rearrangements are responsible for 5% to 10% of cases of unexplained mental retardation. Despite their clinical relevance, methods to screen for these cytogenetically invisible abnormalities on a routine base are scarce. We screened patients with idiopathic mental retardation for subtelomeric aberrations using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). This recently developed technique is based on PCR amplification of ligated probes hybridized to chromosome ends. Currently, 41 telomeres can be screened in just two multiplex reactions. Four subtelomeric rearrangements (5.3%) were detected in a group of 75 patients with mild to severe mental retardation in combination with dysmorphic features and/or a familial history of mental retardation: two terminal 1p deletions, a terminal 1q deletion, and a terminal 3p deletion. Deletions could be verified by FISH and marker analysis. In one case the MLPA indicated a terminal 21q deletion due to a 3-bp deletion at the site of the probe, giving a false-positive rate of 1.3%. This study demonstrates that MLPA is a fast and reliable screening method, potentially suitable for use in routine diagnostics.
14695532	Twenty-two novel mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) underscore the genotype-phenotype correlation in glycogen storage disease type II. Patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) suffer from progressive muscle weakness due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. We have investigated 29 cases of GSDII and thereby identified 55 pathogenic mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) encoding acid maltase. There were 34 different mutations identified, 22 of which were novel. All of the missense mutations and two other mutations with an unpredictable effect on acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis and function were transiently expressed in COS cells. The effect of a novel splice-site mutation was investigated by real-time PCR analysis. The outcome of our analysis underscores the notion that the clinical phenotype of GSDII is largely dictated by the nature of the mutations in the GAA alleles. This genotype-phenotype correlation makes DNA analysis a valuable tool to help predict the clinical course of the disease.
14722921	Context of deletions and insertions in human coding sequences. We studied the dependence of the rate of short deletions and insertions on their contexts using the data on mutations within coding exons at 19 human loci that cause mendelian diseases. We confirm that periodic sequences consisting of three to five or more nucleotides are mutagenic. Mutability of sequences with strongly biased nucleotide composition is also elevated, even when mutations within homonucleotide runs longer than three nucleotides are ignored. In contrast, no elevated mutation rates have been detected for imperfect direct or inverted repeats. Among known candidate contexts, the indel context GTAAGT and regions with purine-pyrimidine imbalance between the two DNA strands are mutagenic in our sample, and many others are not mutagenic. Data on mutation hot spots suggest two novel contexts that increase the deletion rate. Comprehensive analysis of mutability of all possible contexts of lengths four, six, and eight indicates a substantially elevated deletion rate within YYYTG and similar sequences, which is one of the two contexts revealed by the hot spots. Possible contexts that increase the insertion rate (AT(A/C)(A/C)GCC and TACCRC) and decrease deletion (TATCGC) or insertion (GCGG) rates have also been identified. Two-thirds of deletions remove a repeat, and over 80% of insertions create a repeat, i.e., they are duplications.
14974085	Noonan syndrome-associated SHP2/PTPN11 mutants cause EGF-dependent prolonged GAB1 binding and sustained ERK2/MAPK1 activation. Noonan syndrome is a developmental disorder with dysmorphic facies, short stature, cardiac defects, and skeletal anomalies, which can be caused by missense PTPN11 mutations. PTPN11 encodes Src homology 2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2 or SHP-2), a protein tyrosine phosphatase that acts in signal transduction downstream to growth factor, hormone, and cytokine receptors. We compared the functional effects of three Noonan syndrome-causative PTPN11 mutations on SHP2's phosphatase activity, interaction with a binding partner, and signal transduction. All SHP2 mutants had significantly increased basal phosphatase activity compared to wild type, but that activity varied significantly between mutants and was further increased after epidermal growth factor stimulation. Cells expressing SHP2 mutants had prolonged extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 activation, which was ligand-dependent. Binding of SHP2 mutants to Grb2-associated binder-1 was increased and sustained, and tyrosine phosphorylation of both proteins was prolonged. Coexpression of Grb2-associated binder-1-FF, which lacks SHP2 binding motifs, blocked the epidermal growth factor-mediated increase in SHP2's phosphatase activity and resulted in a dramatic reduction of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 activation. Taken together, these results document that Noonan syndrome-associated PTPN11 mutations increase SHP2's basal phosphatase activity, with greater activation when residues directly involved in binding at the interface between the N-terminal Src homology 2 and protein tyrosine phosphatase domains are altered. The SHP2 mutants prolonged signal flux through the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK2/MAPK1) pathway in a ligand-dependent manner that required docking through Grb2-associated binder-1 (GAB1), leading to increased cell proliferation.
15024727	Genetically heterogeneous selective intestinal malabsorption of vitamin B12: founder effects, consanguinity, and high clinical awareness explain aggregations in Scandinavia and the Middle East. Selective intestinal malabsorption of vitamin B(12) causing juvenile megaloblastic anemia (MGA; MIM# 261100) is a recessively inherited disorder that is believed to be rare except for notable clusters of cases in Finland, Norway, and the Eastern Mediterranean region. The disease can be caused by mutations in either the cubilin (CUBN; MGA1; MIM# 602997) or the amnionless (AMN; MIM# 605799) gene. To explain the peculiar geographical distribution, we hypothesized that mutations in one of the genes would mainly be responsible for the disease in Scandinavia, and mutations in the other gene in the Mediterranean region. We studied 42 sibships and found all cases in Finland to be due to CUBN (three different mutations) and all cases in Norway to be due to AMN (two different mutations), while in Turkey, Israel, and Saudi Arabia, there were two different AMN mutations and three different CUBN mutations. Haplotype evidence excluded both CUBN and AMN conclusively in five families and tentatively in three families, suggesting the presence of at least one more gene locus that can cause MGA. We conclude that the Scandinavian cases are typical examples of enrichment by founder effects, while in the Mediterranean region high degrees of consanguinity expose rare mutations in both genes. We suggest that in both regions, physician awareness of this disease causes it to be more readily diagnosed than elsewhere; thus, it may well be more common worldwide than previously thought.
15024732	Analysis of the allele-specific expression of the mismatch repair gene MLH1 using a simple DHPLC-Based Method. Quantitative measures of allele-specific gene expression allow the indirect detection of mutations or sequence variants in regulatory elements or in other non-coding regions that may result in significant physiological or pathological changes of gene expression and may contribute to Mendelian or multifactorial disorders. We have devised a simple method, based on RT-PCR and single nucleotide primer extension (SNuPE) with unlabelled dideoxynucleotides, followed by DHPLC (denaturing high performance liquid chromatography). We established optimal conditions for separation of the extended products corresponding to the alleles of the c.655A>G (p.Ile219Val) SNP, which is the most frequent exonic polymorphism of MLH1. We then genotyped 99 unrelated control subjects and measured the allele-specific MLH1 expression in the 40 heterozygous controls found in this group. This method allowed us to define a narrow range of normal biallelic expression of MLH1, each allele contributing between 44.7% and 55.3% of the total expression. We then measured the allele-specific expression in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) patients with MLH1 mRNAs bearing different stop-codon or frame-shift mutations, or in-frame deletions, in order to detect the effects of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Defects that induce mRNA instability were identified unambiguously and the data were consistent with current models of NMD. This study provides a sensitive tool to identify indirectly MLH1 defects that may escape detection in genomic DNA screenings but result in a quantitative change at the mRNA level.
15146469	Novel and recurrent mutations in the NF1 gene in Italian patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal dominant disorders in humans, affecting 1 in 3500 individuals. NF1 is a fully penetrant exhibiting a mutation rate some 10-fold higher compared to most other disease genes. As a consequence, a high number of cases (up to 50%) are sporadic. Mutation detection is complex due to the large size of NF1 gene, the presence of pseudogenes and the great variety of lesions. In the present study we attempted to delineate the NF1 mutational spectrum in the Italian population reporting four-year experience with the direct analysis of the whole NF1 coding region in 110 unrelated subjects affected by NF1. For each patient, the whole coding sequence and all splice sites were studied for mutations, either by the protein truncation test (PTT), or, most often, by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). Mutations were identified in 75 (68%) patients. Twenty-two mutations were found to be novel. The detection rate for the different methods was 7/18 (39%) for PTT, and 68/103 (66%) for DHPLC. The mutations were evenly distributed along the NF1 coding sequence. Thirty-two of the 75 unrelated NF1 patients in which germline mutations were identified (32/75, 43%) harbour 23 different recurrent mutations. Fifteen sequence variants likely to represent non-pathogenic polymorphisms were observed at the NF1 locus. Genotype-phenotype analysis was unable to detect any obvious correlation.
15365989	Novel homozygous p.E64D mutation in DJ1 in early onset Parkinson disease (PARK7). Mutations in the parkin gene have been identified as a common cause of autosomal recessive inherited Parkinson disease (PD) associated with early disease manifestation. However, based on linkage data, mutations in other genes contribute to the genetic heterogeneity of early-onset PD (EOPD). Recently, two mutations in the DJ1 gene were described as a second cause of autosomal recessive EOPD (PARK7). Analyzing the PARK7/DJ1 gene in 104 EOPD patients, we identified a third mutation, c.192G>C (p.E64D), associated with EOPD in a patient of Turkish ancestry and characterized the functional significance of this amino acid substitution. In the patient, a substantial reduction of dopamine uptake transporter (DAT) binding was found in the striatum using [(18)F]FP-CIT and PET, indicating a serious loss of presynaptic dopaminergic afferents. His sister, homozygous for E64D, was clinically unaffected but showed reduced dopamine uptake when compared with a clinically unaffected brother, who is heterozygous for E64D. We demonstrate by crystallography that the E64D mutation does not alter the structure of the DJ1 protein, however we observe a tendency towards decreased levels of the mutant protein when overexpressed in HEK293 or COS7 cells. Using immunocytochemistry in contrast to the homogenous nuclear and cytoplasmic staining in HEK293 cells overexpressing wild-type DJ1, about 5% of the cells expressing E64D and up to 80% of the cells expressing the recently described L166P mutation displayed a predominant nuclear localization of the mutant DJ1 protein.
15365995	Germline mutations in MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 in Korean hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer families. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), the most common hereditary colon cancer syndrome, is a dominant disorder caused by germline defects in mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Identification of MMR gene mutations can have direct clinical implications in counseling and management of HNPCC families. We screened 44 HNPCC and 97 suspected HNPCC Korean families for germline mutations in three MMR genes: MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6. We identified twelve novel mutations: nine in MLH1(c.632_633insT, c.808_811delACTT, c.845C>G, c.1625A>C, c.1730+1delG, c.1907T>C, c.1918C>T, c.2104-2A>G and c.2170T>A), two in MSH2 (c.1886A>G, c.1316_1318delCCT) and one in MSH6 (c.3488A>T). In addition, two statically significant cSNPs in MLH1: c.1128T>C ( p=0.008 in HNPCC and p=0.037 in early-onset CRC) and c.2168C>A ( p<0.001 in HNPCC). Interestingly, the most frequent mutation, c.1757_1758insC in MLH1, was a founder mutation inherited from a common Korean ancestor.
15459972	Novel and recurrent mutations clustered in the von Willebrand factor A domain of MATN3 in multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) is a common skeletal dysplasia characterized by joint pain and stiffness, delayed and irregular ossification of epiphyses, and early-onset osteoarthritis. Six genes responsible for MED have been identified, including COMP, COL9A1, COL9A2, COL9A3, DSTDT and MATN3. MATN3 encodes matrilin-3, a cartilage-specific extracellular matrix protein. To date, seven different MATN3 mutations have been identified; all are located within the beta-sheet regions of the von Willebrand factor type A (vWFA) domain, which is encoded by exon 2. We examined MATN3 mutations in27 Japanese MED patients who were possibly autosomal dominant inheritance and had been excluded for COMP mutations. Ten of them had a positive family history. We examined all eight exons of MATN3 by PCR and direct sequencing from genomic DNA. We have identified four missense mutations in eight unrelated families; two are novel, and two have been characterized previously. Like previously characterized MATN3 mutations, those identified in this study are clustered within exon 2, specifically in and around the 2nd beta-sheet region of the vWFA domain (aa. 120-127). Contrary to the previous assumption that the MATN3 mutation in MED is confined to the beta-sheet regions, one novel mutation (p.F105S) is located outside the beta-sheet region, within an alpha-helix region.
15712269	Identification and characterization of five novel MAN2B1 mutations in Italian patients with alpha-mannosidosis. Mutation analysis performed on six Italian families with alpha-mannosidosis type II allowed the identification of five new mutations in the MAN2B1 gene: c.157G>T, c.562C>T, c.599A>T, c.293dupA, c.2402G>A (p.E53X, p.R188X, p.H200L, p.Y99VfsX61, p.G801D). Protein residues G801 and H200 are conserved among the four mammalian alpha-mannosidases cloned to date: human, cattle, cat and mouse. In vitro expression studies demonstrated that both missense mutations expressed no residual alpha-mannosidase activity indicating that they are disease-causing mutations. Modelling into the three-dimensional structure revealed that the p.H200L could involve the catalytic mechanism, whereas p.G801D would affect the correct folding of the enzyme.
15776426	Mutational analysis of the NPHP4 gene in 250 patients with nephronophthisis. Nephronophthisis (NPH), a recessive cystic kidney disease, is the most frequent genetic cause for end-stage renal disease in the first two decades of life. Mutations in three genes (NPHP1, 2, and 3) were identified as causative. Extrarenal manifestations are known, such as retinitis pigmentosa (Senior-Loken syndrome, SLS) and ocular motor apraxia type Cogan. Recently, we identified a novel gene (NPHP4) as mutated in NPH. To date, a total of only 13 different NPHP4 mutations have been described. To determine the frequency of NPHP4 mutations, we performed mutational analysis by direct sequencing of all 30 NPHP4 exons in 250 different patients with isolated NPH, SLS, or Cogan syndrome ascertained worldwide over 14 years. We identified 23 novel NPHP4 sequence variants in 26/250 different patients (10%). Interestingly, we detected homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations of NPHP4 in only 6/250 different patients (2.4%), but only one heterozygous NPHP4 sequence variant in 20/250 different patients (8%). In the six patients with two NPHP4 mutations, 5/8 mutations (63%) were likely loss-of-function mutations, whereas in the 20 patients with only one sequence variant, only 1/20 (5%) was a likely loss-of-function (i.e., truncating) mutation. We conclude that: i) two recessive mutations in NPHP4 are a rare cause of nephronophthisis; ii) single heterozygous NPHP4 sequence variants are three times more prevalent than two recessive mutations; iii) there is no genotype/phenotype correlation; iv) there must exist further genes causing nephronophthisis, since in 224/250 (90%) patients, no sequence variants in either of the four NPH genes were detected.
15937921	Niemann-Pick type C disease: subcellular location and functional characterization of NPC2 proteins with naturally occurring missense mutations. Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC), a severe neurovisceral lysosomal disorder, is due to mutations on the NPC1 gene or, in a minority of families, the NPC2 gene. Few investigations have been devoted to the NPC2 protein, for which only 13 different disease-causing mutations (including three novel ones in this report) have been described. Among the currently known NPC2 mutant alleles, six resulted in a premature stop codon. Only five missense mutations, c.115G>A (p.V39M), c.140G>T (p.C47F), c.199T>C (p.S67P), c.278G>T (p.C93F), and (this report) c.295T>C (p.C99R) were identified. In the present study, we generated cDNA constructs harboring each of these missense mutations and, upon overexpression in human fibroblasts with a nonsense NPC2 mutation, characterized the mutated proteins by immunoblotting, immunocytofluorescence microscopy, and complementation. Mutation p.V39M, described in the homozygous state in two patients with an adult-onset neurological disease, resulted in the synthesis of apparently functional recombinant proteins correctly targeted to lysosomes. Although a mild functional impact could possibly be overlooked in our overexpression system, comparative studies with NPC1 mutants indicated that mild mutations might not necessarily affect localization of the protein or its quantity in the native state. Conversely, mutations p.C47F, p.C93R, p.C99R but also, less predictably, p.S67P, led to the synthesis of misfolded recombinant proteins that colocalized with an endoplasmic reticulum marker. The four latter proteins were normally secreted but were unable to correct cholesterol storage in NPC2(-/-) cells. Functional characterization of the mutant proteins showed an excellent genotype-phenotype correlation in the three cases for whom a clinical history was available.
16086324	Comparison of yield and genotyping performance of multiple displacement amplification and OmniPlex whole genome amplified DNA generated from multiple DNA sources. The promise of whole genome amplification (WGA) is that genomic DNA (gDNA) quantity will not limit molecular genetic analyses. Multiple displacement amplification (MDA) and the OmniPlex PCR-based WGA protocols were evaluated using 4 and 5 ng of input gDNA from 60 gDNA samples from three tissue sources (mouthwash, buffy coat, and lymphoblast). WGA DNA (wgaDNA) yield and genotyping performance were evaluated using genotypes determined from gDNA and wgaDNA using the AmpFlSTR Identifiler assay and N = 49 TaqMan SNP assays. Short tandem repeat (STR) and SNP genotyping completion and concordance rates were significantly reduced with wgaDNA from all WGA methods compared with gDNA. OmniPlex wgaDNA exhibited a greater reduction in genotyping performance than MDA wgaDNA. Reduced wgaDNA genotyping performance was due to allelic (all protocols) and locus (OmniPlex) amplification bias leading to heterozygote and locus dropout, respectively, and %GC sequence content (%GC) was significantly correlated with TaqMan assay performance. Lymphoblast wgaDNA exhibited higher yield (OmniPlex), buffy coat wgaDNA exhibited higher STR genotyping completion (MDA), whereas mouthwash wgaDNA exhibited higher SNP genotyping discordance (MDA). Genotyping of wgaDNA generated from < or = 5 ng gDNA, e.g., from archaeological, forensic, prenatal diagnostic, or pathology samples, may require additional genotyping validation with gDNA and/or more sophisticated analysis of genotypes incorporating observed reductions in genotyping performance.
16088919	ATP1A2 mutations in 11 families with familial hemiplegic migraine. Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is an autosomal dominant form of migraine with aura. The disease is caused by mutations of at least three genes among which two have been identified, CACNA1A and ATP1A2. Very few mutations have been identified so far in ATP1A2. We screened the coding sequence of ATP1A2 in 26 unrelated FHM probands in whom CACNA1A screening was negative. A total of eight different mutations were identified in 11 of the probands (41%), including six missense mutations, one small deletion leading to a frameshift, and one in frame deletion. All were novel mutations. Two mutations were recurrent, in three and two families, respectively. Genotyping of 94 relatives of these 11 probands identified 47 mutation carriers, among whom 36 were clinically affected. Sequencing of all 23 exons in an ethnically matched panel detected only one exonic coding polymorphism.
16110485	Intrachromosomal serial replication slippage in trans gives rise to diverse genomic rearrangements involving inversions. Serial replication slippage in cis (SRScis) provides a plausible explanation for many complex genomic rearrangements that underlie human genetic disease. This concept, taken together with the intra- and intermolecular strand switch models that account for mutations that arise via quasipalindrome correction, suggest that intrachromosomal SRS in trans (SRStrans) mediated by short inverted repeats may also give rise to a diverse series of complex genomic rearrangements. If this were to be so, such rearrangements would invariably generate inversions. To test this idea, we collated all informative mutations involving inversions of >or=5 bp but <1 kb by screening the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD; www.hgmd.org) and conducting an extensive literature search. Of the 21 resulting mutations, only two (both of which coincidentally contain untemplated additions) were found to be incompatible with the SRStrans model. Eighteen (one simple inversion, six inversions involving sequence replacement by upstream or downstream sequence, five inversions involving the partial reinsertion of removed sequence, and six inversions that occurred in a more complicated context) of the remaining 19 mutations were found to be consistent with either two steps of intrachromosomal SRStrans or a combination of replication slippage in cis plus intrachromosomal SRStrans. The remaining lesion, a 31-kb segmental duplication associated with a small inversion in the SLC3A1 gene, is explicable in terms of a modified SRS model that integrates the concept of "break-induced replication." This study therefore lends broad support to our postulate that intrachromosomal SRStrans can account for a variety of complex gene rearrangements that involve inversions.
16110494	Rare missense variants in ATP1A2 in families with clustering of common forms of migraine. Migraine is a recurrent neurovascular disease. Its two most common forms-migraine without aura (MO) and migraine with aura (MA)-both show familial clustering and a complex pattern of inheritance. Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is a rare monogenic subform caused by mutations in the calcium channel gene CACNA1A or the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase gene ATP1A2. An involvement of FHM genes in the pathogenesis of common forms of migraine is not proven. We therefore systematically screened ATP1A2 in families with several members affected by MA and/or MO. We identified two novel missense alterations [c.520G>A (p.E174 K) and c.1544G>A (p.C515Y)] in two out of 45 families, which were not found in 520 control chromosomes. Functional studies of these variants in Xenopus oocytes by two-electrode voltage clamp measurements and radiochemical determination of ATPase activity showed that C515Y leads to a complete loss of function comparable with the effect of FHM-mutations whereas for E174 K no functional alteration could be found in the in vitro assays. In conclusion we propose that rare variants in ATP1A2 are involved in the susceptibility to common forms of migraine, because of 1) the absence of alterations in controls, 2) the particular pattern of segregation in both families, 3) the high conservation of mutated residues in Na(+)/K(+)-ATPases, 4) the functional effect of C515Y, and 5) the involvement of ATP1A2 in a monogenic form of migraine.
16116623	Whole genome SNP arrays using DNA derived from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded ovarian tumor tissue. Array-based genotyping platforms, such as the Affymetrix mapping array, have been validated as reliable methods for obtaining high-resolution copy number and allele status information when using DNA derived from fresh tissue sources. However, the suitability of such systems for the examination of DNA derived from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues has not been tested. Therefore, we analyzed DNA derived from five matching fresh frozen and FFPE ovarian tumors for gene copy number changes and loss of heterozygosity using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 10 K Array Xba 131. The data was analyzed using Affymetrix proprietary software, GeneChip DNA Analysis Software, and Chromosome Copy Number Tool. The average SNP call rate (rate of successful genotype identification) of the fresh samples was 89.44% (range 78.72-96.22%, median 92.72%) and was only slightly lower for the matching FFPE samples at 83.48% (range 76.93-93.17%, median 82.60%). The average concordance (rate of agreement between successful genotype calls) between the fresh and matching FFPE samples was 97.06% (range 92.70-99.41%, median 97.52%). Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) profiles of the fresh and FFPE samples were essentially identical across all chromosomes. Copy number data was also comparable, although the quantification of copy number changes appears overstated in the FFPE samples. In conclusion, we have shown that it is possible to achieve high-performance outcomes using FFPE-derived DNA in the Affymetrix 10 K mapping array. This advance will open up vast archival tissue resources to high-resolution genetic analysis and unlock a wealth of biological information.
16138310	Molecular diagnosis of inherited disorders: lessons from hemoglobinopathies. Hemoglobinopathies constitute a major health problem worldwide, with a high carrier frequency, particularly in certain regions where malaria has been endemic. These disorders are characterized by a vast clinical and hematological phenotypic heterogeneity. Over 1,200 different genetic alterations that affect the DNA sequence of the human alpha-like (HBZ, HBA2, HBA1, and HBQ1) and beta-like (HBE1, HBG2, HBG1, HBD, and HBB) globin genes are mainly responsible for the observed clinical heterogeneity. These mutations, together with detailed information about the resulting phenotype, are documented in the globin locus-specific HbVar database. Family studies and comprehensive hematological analyses provide useful insights for accurately diagnosing thalassemia at the DNA level. For this purpose, numerous techniques can provide accurate, rapid, and cost-effective identification of the underlying genetic defect in affected individuals. The aim of this article is to review the diverse methodological and technical platforms available for the molecular diagnosis of inherited disorders, using thalassemia and hemoglobinopathies as a model. This article also attempts to shed light on issues closely related to thalassemia diagnostics, such as prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnoses and genetic counseling, for better-quality disease management.
16211558	Novel mutations of the PCSK9 gene cause variable phenotype of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia. Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is a frequent (1/500) monogenic inherited disorder characterized by isolated elevation of LDL leading to premature cardiovascular disease. ADH is known to result from mutations at two main loci: LDLR (encoding the low density lipoprotein receptor), and APOB (encoding apolipoprotein B100), its natural ligand. We previously demonstrated that ADH is also caused by mutations of the PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) gene that encodes Narc-1 (neural apoptosis-regulated convertase 1). However, the role of this novel disease locus as a cause of hypercholesterolemia remains unclear. In the present study, we analysed the PCSK9 coding region and intronic junctions in 130 adult or pediatric patients with ADH, previously found as being non LDLR/non APOB mutation carriers. Four novel heterozygous missense variations were found: c.654A>T (p.R218S), c.1070G>A (p.R357H), c.1405C>T (p.R469W), and c.1327G>A (p.A443T). All mutations were absent in 340 normolipidemic controls. Except for the A443T, all mutations are nonconservative and modify a highly conserved residue. Segregation with hypercholesterolemia is incomplete in one pedigree. Type and severity of hyperlipidemia and of cardiovascular disease could vary among subjects from the same family. Finally, the proband carrying the R357H mutation exhibited very high plasma cholesterol during pregnancy, whereas the proband carrying the p.R469W mutation exhibited a severe phenotype of hypercholesterolemia in combination with a LDLR mutation resulting from a frameshift at residue F382 (1209delC). These observations suggest that variations in PCSK9 are a rare cause of non LDLR/non APOB ADH (approximately 2.3%) and that additional environmental or genetic factors may contribute to the phenotype caused by PCSK9 missense mutations in humans.
16281286	Spectrum of mutations in mut methylmalonic acidemia and identification of a common Hispanic mutation and haplotype. Cobalamin nonresponsive methylmalonic acidemia (MMA, mut complementation class) results from mutations in the nuclear gene MUT, which codes for the mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl CoA mutase (MCM). To better elucidate the spectrum of mutations that cause MMA, the MUT gene was sequenced in 160 patients with mut MMA. Sequence analysis identified mutations in 96% of disease alleles. Mutations were found in all coding exons, but predominantly in exons 2, 3, 6, and 11. A total of 116 different mutations, 68 of which were novel, were identified. Of the 116 different mutations, 53% were missense mutations, 22% were deletions, duplications or insertions, 16% were nonsense mutations, and 9% were splice-site mutations. Sixty-one of the mutations have only been identified in one family. A novel mutation in exon 2, c.322C>T (p.R108C), was identified in 16 of 27 Hispanic patients. SNP genotyping data demonstrated that Hispanic patients with this mutation share a common haplotype. Three other mutations were seen exclusively in Hispanic patients: c.280G>A (p.G94R), c.1022dupA, and c.970G>A (p.A324T). Seven mutations were seen almost exclusively in black patients, including the previously reported c.2150G>T (p.G717V) mutation, which was identified in 12 of 29 black patients. Two mutations were seen only in Asian patients. Some frequently identified mutations were not population-specific and were identified in patients of various ethnic backgrounds. Some of these mutations were found in mutation clusters in exons 2, 3, 6, and 11, suggesting a recurrent mutation.
16329098	HEY2 mutations in malformed hearts. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hey2 (gridlock) is an important determinant of mammalian heart development, but its role in human ventricular septal defects is unknown. Hey2 functions as a repressor through the bHLH domain. By direct sequencing, we analyzed the sequences encoding the bHLH domain of the human HEY2 in 52 explanted hearts of unrelated patients with complex cardiac malformations, notably ventricular (VSD) and atrioventricular septal defects (AVSD). We found three nonsynonymous mutations, namely, c.286A>G (p.Thr96Ala), c.293A>C (p.Asp98Ala), and c.299T>C (p.Leu100Ser) affecting the second helix of HEY2 in the diseased cardiac tissues of two patients with AVSD. This result suggests a possible role of HEY2 in the regulation of ventricular septation in humans. Since the two AVSD patients carried also binding domain mutations in other cardiac-specific transcription factors, e.g. NKX2-5, TBX5, and GATA4, breakdown of combinatorial interactions of transcription factors may have contributed to the complexity of their cardiac malformations.
16395665	Prioritizing regions of candidate genes for efficient mutation screening. The availability of the complete sequence of the human genome has dramatically facilitated the search for disease-causing sequence variations. In fact, the rate-limiting step has shifted from the discovery and characterization of candidate genes to the actual screening of human populations and the subsequent interpretation of observed variations. In this study we tested the hypothesis that some segments of candidate genes are more likely than others to contain disease-causing variations and that these segments can be predicted bioinformatically. A bioinformatic technique, prioritization of annotated regions (PAR), was developed to predict the likelihood that a specific coding region of a gene will harbor a disease-causing mutation based on conserved protein functional domains and protein secondary structures. This method was evaluated by using it to analyze 710 genes that collectively harbor 4,498 previously identified mutations. Nearly 50% of the genes were recognized as disease-associated after screening only 9% of the complete coding sequence. The PAR technique identified 90% of the genes as containing at least one mutation, with less than 40% of the screening resources that traditional approaches would require. These results suggest that prioritization strategies such as PAR can accelerate disease-gene identification through more efficient use of screening resources.
16411177	Masking selected sequence variation by incorporating mismatches into melting analysis probes. Hybridization probe melting analysis can be complicated by the presence of sequence variation (benign polymorphisms or other mutations) near the targeted mutation. We investigated the use of "masking" probes to differentiate alleles with similar probe melting temperatures. Selected sequence variation was masked by incorporating mismatches (deletion, unmatched nucleotide, or universal base) into hybridization probes at the polymorphic location. Such masking probes create a probe/target mismatch with all possible alleles at the selected polymorphic location. Any allele with additional variation at another site is identified by a lower probe melting temperature than alleles that vary only at the masked position. This "masking technique" was applied to RET protooncogene and HPA6 mutation detection using unlabeled hybridization probes, a saturating dsDNA dye, and high-resolution melting analysis. Masking probes clearly distinguished all targeted mutations from polymorphisms when at least 1 base pair (bp) separated the mutation from the masked variation. We were able to mask polymorphisms immediately adjacent to mutations, except in certain cases, such as those involving single-base deletion probes when both adjacent positions had the same polymorphic nucleotides. The masking probes can also localize mutations to specific codons or nucleotide positions. Masking probes can simplify melting analysis of complex regions and eliminate the need for sequencing.
16671095	A homozygous ZMPSTE24 null mutation in combination with a heterozygous mutation in the LMNA gene causes Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS): insights into the pathophysiology of HGPS. Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a rare premature aging disorder normally caused by a spontaneous heterozygous mutation in the LMNA gene that codes for the nuclear lamina protein lamin A. Several enzymes are involved in the processing of its precursor, prelamin A, to the mature lamin A. A functional knockout of one of the enzymes involved in prelamin A processing, the zinc metalloprotease ZMPSTE24, causes an even more severe disorder with early neonatal death described as restrictive dermatopathy (RD). This work describes a HGPS patient with a combined defect of a homozygous loss-of-function mutation in the ZMPSTE24 gene and a heterozygous mutation in the LMNA gene that results in a C-terminal elongation of the final lamin A. Whereas the loss of function mutation of ZMPSTE24 normally results in lethal RD, the truncation of LMNA seems to be a salvage alteration alleviating the clinical picture to the HGPS phenotype. The mutations of our patient indicate that farnesylated prelamin A is the deleterious agent leading to the HGPS phenotype, which gives further insights into the pathophysiology of the disorder.
16673358	The spectrum of WRN mutations in Werner syndrome patients. The International Registry of Werner syndrome (www.wernersyndrome.org) has been providing molecular diagnosis of the Werner syndrome (WS) for the past decade. The present communication summarizes, from among 99 WS subjects, the spectrum of 50 distinct mutations discovered by our group and by others since the WRN gene (also called RECQL2 or REQ3) was first cloned in 1996; 25 of these have not previously been published. All WRN mutations reported thus far have resulted in the elimination of the nuclear localization signal at the C-terminus of the protein, precluding functional interactions in the nucleus; thus, all could be classified as null mutations. We now report two new mutations in the N-terminus that result in instability of the WRN protein. Clinical data confirm that the most penetrant phenotype is bilateral ocular cataracts. Other cardinal signs were seen in more than 95% of the cases. The median age of death, previously reported to be in the range of 46-48 years, is 54 years. Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) have been cryopreserved from the majority of our index cases, including material from nuclear pedigrees. These, as well as inducible and complemented hTERT (catalytic subunit of human telomerase) immortalized skin fibroblast cell lines are available to qualified investigators.
16906510	Visualization of MAPT inversion on stretched chromosomes of tau-negative frontotemporal dementia patients.
16917930	Structural assessment of single amino acid mutations: application to TP53 function. Single amino acid substitution is the type of protein alteration most related to human diseases. Current studies seek primarily to distinguish neutral mutations from harmful ones. Very few methods offer an explanation of the final prediction result in terms of the probable structural or functional effect on the protein. In this study, we describe the use of three novel parameters to identify experimentally-verified critical residues of the TP53 protein (p53). The first two parameters make use of a surface clustering method to calculate the protein surface area of highly conserved regions or regions with high nonlocal atomic interaction energy (ANOLEA) score. These parameters help identify important functional regions on the surface of a protein. The last parameter involves the use of a new method for pseudobinding free-energy estimation to specifically probe the importance of residue side-chains to the stability of protein fold. A decision tree was designed to optimally combine these three parameters. The result was compared to the functional data stored in the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) TP53 mutation database. The final prediction achieved a prediction accuracy of 70% and a Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.45. It also showed a high specificity of 91.8%. Mutations in the 85 correctly identified important residues represented 81.7% of the total mutations recorded in the database. In addition, the method was able to correctly assign a probable functional or structural role to the residues. Such information could be critical for the interpretation and prediction of the effect of missense mutations, as it not only provided the fundamental explanation of the observed effect, but also helped design the most appropriate laboratory experiment to verify the prediction results.
16941471	Comprehensive NF1 screening on cultured Schwann cells from neurofibromas. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is mainly characterized by the occurrence of benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors or neurofibromas. Thorough investigation of the somatic mutation spectrum has thus far been hampered by the large size of the NF1 gene and the considerable proportion of NF1 heterozygous cells within the tumors. We developed an improved somatic mutation detection strategy on cultured Schwann cells derived from neurofibromas and investigated 38 tumors from nine NF1 patients. Twenty-nine somatic NF1 lesions were detected which represents the highest NF1 somatic mutation detection rate described so far (76%). Furthermore, our data strongly suggest that the acquired second hit underlies reduced NF1 expression in Schwann cell cultures. Together, these data clearly illustrate that two inactivating NF1 mutations, in a subpopulation of the Schwann cells, are required for neurofibroma formation in NF1 tumorigenesis. The observed somatic mutation spectrum shows that intragenic NF1 mutations (26/29) are most prevalent, particularly frameshift mutations (12/29, 41%). We hypothesize that this mutation signature might reflect slightly reduced DNA repair efficiency as a trigger for NF1 somatic inactivation preceding tumorigenesis. Joint analysis of the current and previously published NF1 mutation data revealed a significant difference in the somatic mutation spectrum in patients with a NF1 microdeletion vs. non-microdeletion patients with respect to the prevalence of loss of heterozygosity events (0/15 vs. 41/81). Differences in somatic inactivation mechanism might therefore exist between NF1 microdeletion patients and the general NF1 population.
17024664	Genotype-phenotype correlations in von Hippel-Lindau disease. von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is a dominantly inherited familial cancer syndrome resulting from mutations in the VHL tumor suppressor gene. VHL disease displays marked variation in expression and the presence of pheochromocytoma has been linked to missense VHL mutations. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations in 573 individuals with VHL disease. Routine clinical and radiological surveillance of VHL patients and at-risk relatives was associated with increased detection of retinal angiomatosis (73 vs. 59% of cases) and a reduction in age at diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) (44.0+/-10.9 vs. 39.7+/-10.3 years). We confirmed the association of pheochromocytoma with missense mutations described previously, but stratifying missense mutations into those that resulted in substitution of a surface amino acid and those that disrupted structural integrity demonstrated that surface amino acid substitutions conferred a higher pheochromocytoma risk. Age at first manifestation of VHL disease was significantly earlier (P=0.001), and age-related risks of retinal angiomas and RCC were higher (P=0.022 and P=0.0008, respectively) in individuals with a nonsense or frameshift mutation than in those with deletions or missense mutations that disrupted the structural integrity of the VHL gene product (pVHL). These results extend genotype-phenotype-protein structure correlations in VHL disease and provide a baseline for future chemoprevention studies in VHL disease.
17041889	Recessive arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia due to novel cryptic splice mutation in PKP2. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) is a genetic disorder resulting in fibro-fatty replacement of right ventricular myocytes and consequent ventricular arrhythmias. Heterozygous mutations in PKP2 encoding plakophilin-2 have previously been reported to cause dominant ARVD with reduced penetrance. We report the first case of recessive ARVD caused by mutations in PKP2. Candidate gene analysis in a typical proband with this disorder identified a novel homozygous mutation in PKP2 (c.[2484C>T]+[2484C>T]), which is predicted to be translationally silent (p.Gly828). Analysis of the proband's mRNA, however, shows that this mutation causes predominantly cryptic splicing, with a 7-nucleotide deletion in exon 12. The ensuing frame shift disrupts the last 54 amino acids of plakophilin-2 and extends the open reading frame by 145 nucleotides (48 amino acids) into the 3' untranslated region. Haplotype analysis demonstrates the absence of remote consanguinity. Heterozygous family members produce approximately 60% of properly spliced PKP2 and do not have manifestations of ARVD. Further analysis of PKP2 mRNA sequence revealed two additional alternatively spliced transcripts. The possibility of cryptic or alternative splicing should be considered with identification of apparently synonymous nucleotide substitutions in this gene.
17203459	ZFHX1B mutations in patients with Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a recently delineated mental retardation (MR)-multiple congenital anomaly syndrome, characterized by typical facies, severe MR, epilepsy, and variable congenital malformations, including Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), genital anomalies, congenital heart disease (CHD), and agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC). It is caused by de novo heterozygous mutations or deletions of the ZFHX1B gene located at 2q22. ZFHX1B encodes Smad-interacting protein-1 (SMADIP1 or SIP1), a transcriptional corepressor involved in the transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway. It is a highly evolutionarily conserved gene, widely expressed in embryological development. Over 100 mutations have been described in patients with clinically typical MWS, who almost always have whole gene deletions or truncating mutations (nonsense or frameshift) of ZFHX1B, suggesting that haploinsufficiency is the basis of MWS pathology. No obvious genotype-phenotype correlation could be identified so far, but atypical phenotypes have been reported with missense or splice mutations in the ZFHX1B gene. In this work we describe 40 novel mutations and we summarize the various mutational reports published since the identification of the causative gene.
17279550	Comprehensive evaluation of allele frequency differences of MC1R variants across populations. The melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R), a member of the G protein-coupled receptors superfamily, mediates the response to melanocortins and is currently the best-described contributor to normal pigment variation in humans. A remarkably large number of natural polymorphisms, or variants, of the MC1R gene have been identified in different populations. Some of these variants have been associated with specific hair and skin color phenotypes, the presence of freckling, and melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer risk. Interestingly, some MC1R variants have been associated with skin cancer beyond their effects on pigmentation. Although the red hair color variants (RHC variants) have been associated with skin cancer risk in the Celtic population, studies in darkly-pigmented Caucasian populations have demonstrated the importance of non-RHC MC1R variants on skin cancer risk as well. We have reviewed and compared allele frequency differences of MC1R variants across geographic regions. We observed large differences in the distribution of variants across populations, with a prominent difference between lightly and darkly-pigmented individuals. Moreover, among Caucasian groups, there were seven variants (p.V60L, p.V92M, p.D84E, p.R151C, p.R160W, p.R163Q, and p.D294H) with significantly different allele frequencies. Exploring differences in allele frequencies of MC1R variants across populations with varying pigmentation and differing skin cancer risk may improve our understanding of the complex relationship between MC1R, pigmentation, and carcinogenesis.
17285591	Partial duplication at AZFc on the Y chromosome is a risk factor for impaired spermatogenesis in Han Chinese in Taiwan. The Azoospermia Factor c (AZFc) region on the Y chromosome long arm is one of the least stable regions in the human genome. It consists almost entirely of very long repeats and is prone to rearrangement. Numerous structures at AZFc have been identified, and some of them have been reported to be associated with male infertility. We screened 580 Han Chinese in Taiwan for AZFc deletion and duplication using three PCR assays, and characterized the DAZ genes in selected subjects with additional Southern analyses. About 9.5% of our subjects have AZFc partial deletion, 2.8% have partial deletion followed by duplication, and 1.7% have partial duplication. The overall rearrangement frequencies vary significantly between different Y chromosome haplogroups (Yhgs), ranging from 2.9% in O3e to 100% in N and Q. All individuals in Yhg-N lack the sY1191 marker, but one out of three of them actually have four DAZ genes, indicating further duplication after the b2/b3 deletion. Our additional screening of 142 oligospermic men and 107 fertile controls found no significant difference in the frequencies of the gr/gr and the b2/b3 deletion. However, the frequency of AZFc partial duplication in the infertile group (7.0%) was significantly higher than that in the fertile control group (0.9%) and the general Taiwanese population (1.7%). Our results indicate that AZFc partial deletion and partial duplication are common polymorphisms in Han Chinese, and that the AZFc partial duplication, but not the AZFc partial deletion, is a risk factor for male infertility in the Taiwanese population.
17311297	Extensive in silico analysis of NF1 splicing defects uncovers determinants for splicing outcome upon 5' splice-site disruption. We describe 94 pathogenic NF1 gene alterations in a cohort of 97 Austrian neurofibromatosis type 1 patients meeting the NIH criteria. All mutations were fully characterized at the genomic and mRNA levels. Over half of the patients carried novel mutations, and only a quarter carried recurrent minor-lesion mutations at 16 mutational warm spots. The remaining patients carried NF1 microdeletions (7%) and rare recurring mutations. Thirty-six of the mutations (38%) altered pre-mRNA splicing, and fall into five groups: exon skipping resulting from mutations at authentic splice sites (type I), cryptic exon inclusion caused by deep intronic mutations (type II), creation of de novo splice sites causing loss of exonic sequences (type III), activation of cryptic splice sites upon authentic splice-site disruption (type IV), and exonic sequence alterations causing exon skipping (type V). Extensive in silico analyses of 37 NF1 exons and surrounding intronic sequences suggested that the availability of a cryptic splice site combined with a strong natural upstream 3' splice site (3'ss)is the main determinant of cryptic splice-site activation upon 5' splice-site disruption. Furthermore, the exonic sequences downstream of exonic cryptic 5' splice sites (5'ss) resemble intronic more than exonic sequences with respect to exonic splicing enhancer and silencer density, helping to distinguish between exonic cryptic and pseudo 5'ss. This study provides valuable predictors for the splicing pathway used upon 5'ss mutation, and underscores the importance of using RNA-based techniques, together with methods to identify microdeletions and intragenic copy-number changes, for effective and reliable NF1 mutation detection.
17492639	Characterization of a familial t(16;22) balanced translocation associated with congenital cataract leads to identification of a novel gene, TMEM114, expressed in the lens and disrupted by the translocation. Molecular characterization of chromosomal rearrangements is a powerful resource in identification of genes associated with monogenic disorders. We describe the molecular characterization of a balanced familial chromosomal translocation, t(16;22)(p13.3;q11.2), segregating with congenital lamellar cataract. This led to the discovery of a cluster of lens-derived expressed sequence tags (ESTs) close to the 16p13.3 breakpoint. This region harbors a locus associated with cataract and microphthalmia. Long-range PCR and 16p13.3 breakpoint sequencing identified genomic sequence in a human genome sequence gap, and allowed identification of a novel four-exon gene, designated TMEM114, which encodes a predicted protein of 223 amino acids. The breakpoint lies in the promoter region of TMEM114 and separates the gene from predicted eye-specific upstream transcription factor binding sites. There is sequence conservation among orthologs down to zebrafish. The protein is predicted to contain four transmembrane domains with homology to the lens intrinsic membrane protein, LIM2 (also known as MP20), in the PMP-22/EMP/MP20 family. TMEM114 mutation screening in 130 congenital cataract patients revealed missense mutations leading to the exchange of highly-conserved amino acids in the first extracellular domain of the protein (p.I35T, p.F106L) in two separate patients and their reportedly healthy sibling and mother, respectively. In the lens, Tmem114 shows expression in the lens epithelial cells extending into the transitional zone where early fiber differentiation occurs. Our findings implicate dysregulation of expression of this novel human gene, TMEM114, in mammalian cataract formation.
17579354	Women heterozygous for NALP7/NLRP7 mutations are at risk for reproductive wastage: report of two novel mutations. Familial recurrent hydatidiform moles are a rare recessive condition in which molar tissues have biparental contribution to their genome. One maternal locus responsible for this condition has been mapped to 19q13.4 and the causative gene, NALP7, identified (HUGO-approved nomenclature is now NLRP7). Here we report a first stop codon, c.295G>T (p.Glu99X) and a missense mutation, c.1970A>T (p.Asp657Val) in NLRP7 in two sisters with RHMs. We found these two mutations and a previously reported one, c.2078G>C (p.Arg693Pro) in a homozygous state, in males with normal reproductive outcomes. This suggests that NLRP7 is not required for normal spermatogenesis. The mother of the patients is heterozygous for Glu99X and had one stillbirth and three normal pregnancies. Our data on this new family and on heterozygous women from previously reported families indicate that women heterozygous for NLRP7 mutations are at risk for reproductive wastage without the manifestation of molar phenotype.
17594715	Spectrum of ALMS1 variants and evaluation of genotype-phenotype correlations in Alstrm syndrome. Alstrm syndrome is a monogenic recessive disorder featuring an array of clinical manifestations, with systemic fibrosis and multiple organ involvement, including retinal degeneration, hearing loss, childhood obesity, diabetes mellitus, dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), urological dysfunction, and pulmonary, hepatic, and renal failure. We evaluated a large cohort of patients with Alstrm syndrome for mutations in the ALMS1 gene. In total, 79 disease-causing variants were identified, of which 55 are novel mutations. The variants are primarily clustered in exons 8, 10, and 16, although we also identified novel mutations in exons 12 and 18. Most alleles were identified only once (45/79), but several were found recurrently. Founder effects are likely in families of English and Turkish descent. We also identified 66 SNPs and assessed the functional significance of these variants based on the conserved identity of the protein and the severity of the resulting amino acid substitution. A genotype-phenotype association study examining 18 phenotypic parameters in a subset of 58 patients found suggestive associations between disease-causing variants in exon 16 and the onset of retinal degeneration before the age of 1 year (P = 0.02), the occurrence of urological dysfunction (P = 0.02), of DCM (P = 0.03), and of diabetes (P = 0.03). A significant association was found between alterations in exon 8 and absent, mild, or delayed renal disease (P = 0.0007). This data may have implications for the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of ALMS1 and provides the basis for further investigation of how alternative splicing of ALMS1 contributes to the severity of the disease.
17621637	Lack of SSH1 mutations in Dutch patients with disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis: is there really an association?
17621639	Detection of pathogenic gene copy number variations in patients with mental retardation by genomewide oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization. Genomic imbalance is a major cause of developmental disorders. Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) has revealed frequent imbalances associated with clinical syndromes, but also a large number of copy number variations (CNVs), which have complicated the interpretation of results. We studied 100 consecutive patients with unexplained mental retardation and a normal karyotype using several platforms of CGH arrays. A genomewide array with 44,290 oligonucleotide probes (OaCGH44K) detected imbalances in 15% of cases studied with sizes ranged from 459 kb to 19 Mb while revealing a small number of CNVs (0.72/individual). Another platform with approximately 240,000 oligonucleotide probes (OaCGH244K) revealed a large number of CNVs (20/individual) in selected cases and their normal parents. We used a comprehensive approach for interpreting the results of aCGH, including consideration of the size, inheritance and gene content of CNVs, and consultation with an online Database of Genomic Variants (DGV) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Men (OMIM) for information on the genes involved. Our study suggests that genomewide oligonucleotide arrays such as the OaCGH44K platform can be used as a powerful diagnostic tool for detection of genomic imbalances associated with unexplained mental retardation or syndromic autism spectrum disorders. It is interesting to note that a small number of common variants were revealed by OaCGH244K in some study subjects but not in their parents and that some inherited CNVs had altered breakpoints. Further investigations on these alterations may provide useful information for understanding the mechanism of CNVs.
17721928	Identification of the first germline mutation in the extracellular domain of the follitropin receptor responsible for spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. The receptors for follitropin (FSHR), thyrotropin (TSHR), and lutropin/chorionic gonadotropin (LHCGR) are the members of the glycoprotein hormone (GPH) receptors (GPHR) family. They present a bipartite structure with a large extracellular amino-terminal domain (ECD), responsible for high-affinity hormone binding, and a carboxyl-terminal serpentine region, implicated in transduction of the activation signal. Spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (sOHSS) is a rare genetic condition in which human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) promiscuously stimulates the FSHR during the first trimester of pregnancy. Surprisingly, germline FSHR mutations responsible for the disease have so far been found only in the transmembrane helices of the serpentine region of the FSHR, outside the hormone binding domain. When tested functionally, all mutants were abnormally sensitive to both hCG and thyrotropin (TSH) while displaying constitutive activity. This loss of ligand specificity was attributed to the lowering of an intramolecular barrier of activation rather than to an increase of binding affinity. Here we report the first germline mutation responsible for sOHSS (c.383C>A, p.Ser128Tyr), located in the ECD of the FSHR. Contrary to the mutations described previously, the p.Ser128Tyr FSHR mutant displayed increase in affinity and sensitivity toward hCG and did not show any constitutive activity, nor promiscuous activation by TSH. Thus, sOHSS can be achieved from different molecular mechanisms involving each functional domains of the FSHR. Based on the structure of the FSHR/FSH complex and site-directed mutagenesis studies, we provide robust molecular models for the GPH/GPHR complexes and we propose a molecular explanation to the binding characteristics of the p.Ser128Tyr mutant.
17879353	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1): analysis of 1336 mutations reported in the first decade following identification of the gene. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the occurrence of tumors of the parathyroids, pancreas, and anterior pituitary. The MEN1 gene, which was identified in 1997, consists of 10 exons that encode a 610-amino acid protein referred to as menin. Menin is predominantly a nuclear protein that has roles in transcriptional regulation, genome stability, cell division, and proliferation. Germline mutations usually result in MEN1 or occasionally in an allelic variant referred to as familial isolated hyperparathyroidism (FIHP). MEN1 tumors frequently have loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the MEN1 locus, which is consistent with a tumor suppressor role of MEN1. Furthermore, somatic abnormalities of MEN1 have been reported in MEN1 and non-MEN1 endocrine tumors. The clinical aspects and molecular genetics of MEN1 are reviewed together with the reported 1,336 mutations. The majority (>70%) of these mutations are predicted to lead to truncated forms of menin. The mutations are scattered throughout the>9-kb genomic sequence of the MEN1 gene. Four, which consist of c.249_252delGTCT (deletion at codons 83-84), c.1546_1547insC (insertion at codon 516), c.1378C>T (Arg460Ter), and c.628_631delACAG (deletion at codons 210-211) have been reported to occur frequently in 4.5%, 2.7%, 2.6%, and 2.5% of families, respectively. However, a comparison of the clinical features in patients and their families with the same mutations reveals an absence of phenotype-genotype correlations. The majority of MEN1 mutations are likely to disrupt the interactions of menin with other proteins and thereby alter critical events in cell cycle regulation and proliferation.
17918732	An integrated genetic and functional analysis of the role of type II transmembrane serine proteases (TMPRSSs) in hearing loss. Building on our discovery that mutations in the transmembrane serine protease, TMPRSS3, cause nonsyndromic deafness, we have investigated the contribution of other TMPRSS family members to the auditory function. To identify which of the 16 known TMPRSS genes had a strong likelihood of involvement in hearing function, three types of biological evidence were examined: 1) expression in inner ear tissues; 2) location in a genomic interval that contains a yet unidentified gene for deafness; and 3) evaluation of hearing status of any available Tmprss knockout mouse strains. This analysis demonstrated that, besides TMPRSS3, another TMPRSS gene was essential for hearing and, indeed, mice deficient for Hepsin (Hpn) also known as Tmprss1 exhibited profound hearing loss. In addition, TMPRSS2, TMPRSS5, and CORIN, also named TMPRSS10, showed strong likelihood of involvement based on their inner ear expression and mapping position within deafness loci PKSR7, DFNB24, and DFNB25, respectively. These four TMPRSS genes were then screened for mutations in affected members of the DFNB24 and DFNB25 deafness families, and in a cohort of 362 sporadic deaf cases. This large mutation screen revealed numerous novel sequence variations including three potential pathogenic mutations in the TMPRSS5 gene. The mutant forms of TMPRSS5 showed reduced or absent proteolytic activity. Subsequently, TMPRSS genes with evidence of involvement in deafness were further characterized, and their sites of expression were determined. Tmprss1, 3, and 5 proteins were detected in spiral ganglion neurons. Tmprss3 was also present in the organ of Corti. TMPRSS1 and 3 proteins appeared stably anchored to the endoplasmic reticulum membranes, whereas TMPRSS5 was also detected at the plasma membrane. Collectively, these results provide evidence that TMPRSS1 and TMPRSS3 play and TMPRSS5 may play important and specific roles in hearing.
18381613	A multicenter study on the prevalence and spectrum of mutations in the otoferlin gene (OTOF) in subjects with nonsyndromic hearing impairment and auditory neuropathy. Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment (NSHI) is a heterogeneous condition, for which 53 genetic loci have been reported, and 29 genes have been identified to date. One of these, OTOF, encodes otoferlin, a membrane-anchored calcium-binding protein that plays a role in the exocytosis of synaptic vesicles at the auditory inner hair cell ribbon synapse. We have investigated the prevalence and spectrum of deafness-causing mutations in the OTOF gene. Cohorts of 708 Spanish, 83 Colombian, and 30 Argentinean unrelated subjects with autosomal recessive NSHI were screened for the common p.Gln829X mutation. In compound heterozygotes, the second mutant allele was identified by DNA sequencing. In total, 23 Spanish, two Colombian and two Argentinean subjects were shown to carry two mutant alleles of OTOF. Of these, one Colombian and 13 Spanish subjects presented with auditory neuropathy. In addition, a cohort of 20 unrelated subjects with a diagnosis of auditory neuropathy, from several countries, was screened for mutations in OTOF by DNA sequencing. A total of 11 of these subjects were shown to carry two mutant alleles of OTOF. In total, 18 pathogenic and four neutral novel alleles of the OTOF gene were identified. Haplotype analysis for markers close to OTOF suggests a common founder for the novel c.2905_2923delinsCTCCGAGCGCA mutation, frequently found in Argentina. Our results confirm that mutation of the OTOF gene correlates with a phenotype of prelingual, profound NSHI, and indicate that OTOF mutations are a major cause of inherited auditory neuropathy.
18429048	Haplotype analysis suggests a single Balkan origin for the Gaucher disease [D409H;H255Q] double mutant allele. Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease that is mainly due to mutations in the GBA gene. Most of the mutant alleles described so far bear a single mutation. However, there are a few alleles bearing two or more DNA changes. It has been reported that patients homozygous for the [D409H;H255Q] double mutant allele (HGVS-approved nomenclature, p.[D448H;H294Q]) present a more severe phenotype than patients homozygous for the relatively common D409H mutation. In this study, we confirmed the detrimental cumulative effect of these two mutations at the enzymatic activity level by the heterologous expression of the single and double mutant alleles. Additionally, we found a high frequency of the [D409H;H255Q] allele in patients from the Balkans and the Adriatic area of Italy. This prompted us to perform a haplotype analysis, using five microsatellite polymorphisms close to the GBA gene, to determine the origin of this allele. The results of the 37 chromosomes analysed showed that most of them share a common haplotype and are consistent with a single origin in the Balkans and the Adriatic area of Italy for the [D409H;H255Q] allele.
18446851	Parkes Weber syndrome, vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation, and other fast-flow vascular anomalies are caused by RASA1 mutations. Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation (CM-AVM) is a newly recognized autosomal dominant disorder, caused by mutations in the RASA1 gene in six families. Here we report 42 novel RASA1 mutations and the associated phenotype in 44 families. The penetrance and de novo occurrence were high. All affected individuals presented multifocal capillary malformations (CMs), which represent the hallmark of the disorder. Importantly, one-third had fast-flow vascular lesions. Among them, we observed severe intracranial AVMs, including vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation, which were symptomatic at birth or during infancy, extracranial AVM of the face and extremities, and Parkes Weber syndrome (PKWS), previously considered sporadic and nongenetic. These fast-flow lesions can be differed from the other two genetic AVMs seen in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) and in phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) hamartomatous tumor syndrome. Finally, some CM-AVM patients had neural tumors reminiscent of neurofibromatosis type 1 or 2. This is the first extensive study on the phenotypes associated with RASA1 mutations, and unravels their wide heterogeneity.
18449911	Evaluation of in silico splice tools for decision-making in molecular diagnosis. It appears that all types of genomic nucleotide variations can be deleterious by affecting normal pre-mRNA splicing via disruption/creation of splice site consensus sequences. As it is neither pertinent nor realistic to perform functional testing for all of these variants, it is important to identify those that could lead to a splice defect in order to restrict transcript analyses to the most appropriate cases. Web-based tools designed to provide such predictions are available. We evaluated the performance of six of these tools (Splice Site Prediction by Neural Network [NNSplice], Splice-Site Finder [SSF], MaxEntScan [MES], Automated Splice-Site Analyses [ASSA], Exonic Splicing Enhancer [ESE] Finder, and Relative Enhancer and Silencer Classification by Unanimous Enrichment [RESCUE]-ESE) using 39 unrelated retinoblastoma patients carrying different RB1 variants (31 intronic and eight exonic). These 39 patients were screened for abnormal splicing using puromycin-treated cell lines and the results were compared to the predictions. As expected, 17 variants impacting canonical AG/GT splice sites were correctly predicted as deleterious. A total of 22 variations occurring at loosely defined positions (+/-60 nucleotides from an AG/GT site) led to a splice defect in 19 cases and 16 of them were classified as deleterious by at least one tool (84% sensitivity). In other words, three variants escaped in silico detection and the remaining three were correctly predicted as neutral. Overall our results suggest that a combination of complementary in silico tools is necessary to guide molecular geneticists (balance between the time and cost required by RNA analysis and the risk of missing a deleterious mutation) because the weaknesses of one in silico tool may be overcome by the results of another tool.
18454449	A meta-analysis of nonsense mutations causing human genetic disease. Nonsense mutations account for approximately 11% of all described gene lesions causing human inherited disease and approximately 20% of disease-associated single-basepair substitutions affecting gene coding regions. Pathological nonsense mutations resulting in TGA (38.5%), TAG (40.4%), and TAA (21.1%) occur in different proportions to naturally occurring stop codons. Of the 23 different nucleotide substitutions giving rise to nonsense mutations, the most frequent are CGA --> TGA (21%; resulting from methylation-mediated deamination) and CAG --> TAG (19%). The differing nonsense mutation frequencies are largely explicable in terms of variable nucleotide substitution rates such that it is unnecessary to invoke differential translational termination efficiency or differential codon usage. Some genes are characterized by numerous nonsense mutations but relatively few if any missense mutations (e.g., CHM) whereas other genes exhibit many missense mutations but few if any nonsense mutations (e.g., PSEN1). Genes in the latter category have a tendency to encode proteins characterized by multimer formation. Consistent with the operation of a clinical selection bias, genes exhibiting an excess of nonsense mutations are also likely to display an excess of frameshift mutations. Tumor suppressor (TS) genes exhibit a disproportionate number of nonsense mutations while most mutations in oncogenes are missense. A total of 12% of somatic nonsense mutations in TS genes were found to occur recurrently in the hypermutable CpG dinucleotide. In a comparison of somatic and germline mutational spectra for 17 TS genes, approximately 43% of somatic nonsense mutations had counterparts in the germline (rising to 98% for CpG mutations). Finally, the proportion of disease-causing nonsense mutations predicted to elicit nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is significantly higher (P=1.56 x 10(-9)) than among nonobserved (potential) nonsense mutations, implying that nonsense mutations that elicit NMD are more likely to come to clinical attention.
18521937	Mutations in CNGA3 impair trafficking or function of cone cyclic nucleotide-gated channels, resulting in achromatopsia. CNGA3 encodes the A-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channel, which is a crucial component of the phototransduction cascade in cone outer segments. Mutations in the CNGA3 gene have been associated with complete and incomplete forms of achromatopsia (ACHR), a congenital, autosomal recessively inherited retinal disorder characterized by lack of color discrimination, reduced visual acuity, nystagmus, and photophobia. Here we report the identification of three novel CNGA3 missense mutations in ACHR patients: c.682G>A (p.E228 K), c.1315C>T (p.R439W), and c.1405G>A (p.A469 T), and the detailed functional analyses of these new as well as five previously reported mutations (R283Q, T291R, F547L, G557R, and E590 K), in conjunction with clinical data of patients carrying these mutations, to establish genotype-phenotype correlations. The functional characterization of mutant CNGA3 channels was performed with calcium imaging and patch clamp recordings in a heterologous HEK293 cell expression system. Results were corroborated by immunostaining and colocalization experiments of the channel protein with the plasma membrane. Several mutations evoked pronounced alterations of the apparent cGMP sensitivity of mutant channels. These functional defects were fully or partially compensated by coexpressing the mutant CNGA3 subunit with the wild-type CNGB3 subunit for channels with the mutations R439W, A469 T, F547L, and E590 K. We could show that several mutant channels with agonist dose-response relationships similar to the wild-type exhibited severely impaired membrane targeting. In addition, this study presents the positive effect of reduced cell culture temperature on surface expression and functional performance of mutant CNG channels with protein folding or trafficking defects.
18683858	Ancestry informative marker sets for determining continental origin and admixture proportions in common populations in America. To provide a resource for assessing continental ancestry in a wide variety of genetic studies, we identified, validated, and characterized a set of 128 ancestry informative markers (AIMs). The markers were chosen for informativeness, genome-wide distribution, and genotype reproducibility on two platforms (TaqMan assays and Illumina arrays). We analyzed genotyping data from 825 subjects with diverse ancestry, including European, East Asian, Amerindian, African, South Asian, Mexican, and Puerto Rican. A comprehensive set of 128 AIMs and subsets as small as 24 AIMs are shown to be useful tools for ascertaining the origin of subjects from particular continents, and to correct for population stratification in admixed population sample sets. Our findings provide general guidelines for the application of specific AIM subsets as a resource for wide application. We conclude that investigators can use TaqMan assays for the selected AIMs as a simple and cost efficient tool to control for differences in continental ancestry when conducting association studies in ethnically diverse populations.
18726931	FOXL2 mutations and genomic rearrangements in BPES. The FOXL2 gene is one of 10 forkhead genes, the mutations of which lead to human developmental disorders, often with ocular manifestations. Mutations in FOXL2 are known to cause blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), an autosomal dominant eyelid malformation associated (type I) or not (type II) with ovarian dysfunction, leading to premature ovarian failure (POF). In addition, a few mutations have been described in patients with isolated POF. Here, we review all currently described FOXL2 sequence variations and genomic rearrangements in BPES and POF. Using a combined mutation detection approach, it is possible to identify the underlying genetic defect in a major proportion (88%) of typical BPES patients. Of all genetic defects found in our BPES cohort, intragenic mutations represent 81%. They include missense changes, frameshift and nonsense mutations, in-frame deletions, and duplications, that are distributed along the single-exon gene. Genomic rearrangements comprising both deletions encompassing FOXL2 and deletions located outside its transcription unit, represent 12% and 5% of all genetic defects in our BPES cohort, respectively. One of the challenges of genetic testing in BPES is the establishment of genotype-phenotype correlations, mainly with respect to the ovarian phenotype. Genetic testing should be performed in the context of genetic counseling, however, and should be systematically complemented by a multidisciplinary clinical follow-up. Another challenge for health care professionals involved in BPES is the treatment of the eyelid phenotype and the prevention or treatment of POF.
18752264	Ethnically diverse causes of Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS): FCMD mutations are a more common cause of WWS outside of the Middle East. Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disease characterized by congenital muscular dystrophy, cobblestone lissencephaly, and ocular malformations. Mutations in six genes involved in the glycosylation of -dystroglycan (POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1, FCMD, FKRP and LARGE) have been identified in WWS patients, but account for only a portion of WWS cases. To better understand the genetics of WWS and establish the frequency and distribution of mutations across WWS genes, we genotyped all known loci in a cohort of 43 WWS patients of varying geographical and ethnic origin. Surprisingly, we reached a molecular diagnosis for 40% of our patients and found mutations in POMT1, POMT2, FCMD and FKRP, many of which were novel alleles, but no mutations in POMGNT1 or LARGE. Notably, the FCMD gene was a more common cause of WWS than previously expected in the European/American subset of our cohort, including all Ashkenazi Jewish cases, who carried the same founder mutation.
18767143	The FBN2 gene: new mutations, locus-specific database (Universal Mutation Database FBN2), and genotype-phenotype correlations. Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) is an extremely rare disease, due to mutations in the FBN2 gene encoding fibrillin-2. Another member of the fibrillin family, the FBN1 gene, is involved in a broad phenotypic continuum of connective-tissue disorders including Marfan syndrome. Identifying not only what is in common but also what differentiates these two proteins should enable us to better comprehend their respective functions and better understand the multitude of diseases in which these two genes are involved. In 1995 we created a locus-specific database (LSDB) for FBN1 mutations with the Universal Mutation Database (UMD) tool. To facilitate comparison of identified mutations in these two genes and search for specific functional areas, we created an LSDB for the FBN2 gene: the UMD-FBN2 database. This database lists 26 published and six newly identified mutations that mainly comprise missense and splice-site mutations. Although the number of described FBN2 mutations was low, the frequency of joint dislocation was significantly higher with missense mutations when compared to splice site mutations.
19058223	Mutational profiling of cancer candidate genes in glioblastoma, melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma reveals a snapshot of their genomic landscapes. A recent systematic analysis of 18.191 well annotated coding sequences (RefSeq) in breast and colorectal cancers has led to the identification of somatic mutations in 1.718 genes (Wood et al., 2007). Based on statistical parameters 280 of these have been denominated candidate cancer (CAN) genes. This analysis has provided an interesting snapshot of the landscape of tumor genomes by showing that they contain a few frequently mutated genes (denominated 'mountains'). On the contrary, the large majority of CAN genes are altered at low frequency (designated 'hills'). Whether 'hill' type CAN genes are tumor specific is largely unknown. To address this question we evaluated the mutational profiles of 27 'hill' CAN genes in glioblastoma, melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma by sequencing the exons previously found mutated by Wood and colleagues. Only 4 of the breast/colorectal 'hill' type CAN genes (SMAD4, MYO18B, NAV3 and MMP2) were also mutated in melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma, while none was altered in glioblastoma. These results suggest that 'hill' type CAN genes are not frequently shared by different tumor types and that their mutation patterns are tissue specific. Tumor-specific genome wide mutational profiling will be required to identify 'hill' type CAN genes that characterize the genomic landscapes of each cancer lineage.
19191333	Functional characterization of ryanodine receptor (RYR1) sequence variants using a metabolic assay in immortalized B-lymphocytes. Mutations in the RYR1 gene are linked to malignant hyperthermia (MH), central core disease and multi-minicore disease. We screened by DHPLC the RYR1 gene in 24 subjects for mutations, and characterized functional alterations caused by some RYR1 variants. Three novel sequence variants and twenty novel polymorphisms were identified. Immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines from patients with RYR1 variants and from controls were stimulated with 4-chloro-m-cresol (4-CmC) and the rate of extracellular acidification was recorded. We demonstrate that the increased acidification rate of lymphoblastoid cells in response to 4-CmC is mainly due to RYR1 activation. Cells expressing RYR1 variants in the N-terminal and in the central region of the protein (p.Arg530His, p.Arg2163Pro, p.Asn2342Ser, p.Glu2371Gly and p.Arg2454His) displayed higher activity compared with controls; this could account for the MH-susceptible phenotype. Cell lines harboring RYR1(Cys4664Arg) were significantly less activated by 4-CmC. This result indicates that the p.Cys4664Arg variant causes a leaky channel and depletion of intracellular stores. The functional changes detected corroborate the variants analyzed as disease-causing alterations and the acidification rate measurements as a means to monitor Ca(2+)-induced metabolic changes in cells harboring mutant RYR1 channels.
19370757	An update on mutations of the SLC39A4 gene in acrodermatitis enteropathica. Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) is a very rare inherited recessive disease caused by severe zinc deficiency. It typically occurs in early infancy and is characterized by periorificial and acral dermatitis, alopecia, and diarrhea. In 2002, both we and others identified the AE SLC39A4 gene located at 8q24.3, and described the first causative mutations for the disease. The SLC39A4 gene encodes a zinc-specific transporter belonging to the Zinc/Iron-regulated transporter-like family, which is highly expressed in the duodenum and jejunum. The SLC39A4 mutations are spread over the entire gene and include many different types of mutations. We report here the identification of five novel variants, including three likely pathogenic mutations. Since the first description, 31 mutations or unclassified variants of SLC39A4 have been reported in this gene. Although most of the patients with AE carry homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations, some of them have either no SLC39A4 mutation or only a monoallelic mutation. Thus, a genotype-phenotype correlation is not easily defined for all AE patients, and the molecular basis of the disease could be more complex than previously described. In cases unexplained by current genetic analyses, the most plausible molecular causes could be a dysregulation of the SLC39A4 gene transcription -- involving either metal response elements (MREs) or a modifier gene -- or the existence of another putative AE gene. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of SLC39A4 mutations, as well as the future prospects to fully unravel the pathogenesis of AE.
19462467	Molecular profiling of the "plexinome" in melanoma and pancreatic cancer. Plexins are transmembrane high-affinity receptors for semaphorins, regulating cell guidance, motility, and invasion. Functional evidences implicate semaphorin signals in cancer progression and metastasis. Yet, it is largely unknown whether plexin genes are genetically altered in human tumors. We performed a comprehensive gene copy analysis and mutational profiling of all nine members of the plexin gene family (plexinome), in melanomas and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs), which are characterized by high metastatic potential and poor prognosis. Gene copy analysis detected amplification of PLXNA4 in melanomas, whereas copy number losses of multiple plexin genes were seen in PDACs. Somatic mutations were detected in PLXNA4, PLXNB3, and PLXNC1; providing the first evidence that these plexins are mutated in human cancer. Functional assays in cellular models revealed that some of these missense mutations result in loss of plexin function. For instance, c.1613G>A, p.R538H mutation in the extracellular domain of PLXNB3 prevented binding of the ligand Sema5A. Moreover, although PLXNA4 signaling can inhibit tumor cell migration, the mutated c.5206C>T, p.H1736Y allele had lost this activity. Our study is the first systematic analysis of the "plexinome" in human tumors, and indicates that multiple mutated plexins may be involved in cancer progression.
19626718	Insights into the importance of miRNA-related polymorphisms to heart disease.
19718767	NR2E3 mutations in enhanced S-cone sensitivity syndrome (ESCS), Goldmann-Favre syndrome (GFS), clumped pigmentary retinal degeneration (CPRD), and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). NR2E3, also called photoreceptor-specific nuclear receptor (PNR), is a transcription factor of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily whose expression is uniquely restricted to photoreceptors. There, its physiological activity is essential for proper rod and cone photoreceptor development and maintenance. Thirty-two different mutations in NR2E3 have been identified in either homozygous or compound heterozygous state in the recessively inherited enhanced S-cone sensitivity syndrome (ESCS), Goldmann-Favre syndrome (GFS), and clumped pigmentary retinal degeneration (CPRD). The clinical phenotype common to all these patients is night blindness, rudimental or absent rod function, and hyperfunction of the "blue" S-cones. A single p.G56R mutation is inherited in a dominant manner and causes retinitis pigmentosa (RP). We have established a new locus-specific database for NR2E3 (www.LOVD.nl/eye), containing all reported mutations, polymorphisms, and unclassified sequence variants, including novel ones. A high proportion of mutations are located in the evolutionarily-conserved DNA-binding domains (DBDs) and ligand-binding domains (LBDs) of NR2E3. Based on homology modeling of these NR2E3 domains, we propose a structural localization of mutated residues. The high variability of clinical phenotypes observed in patients affected by NR2E3-linked retinal degenerations may be caused by different disease mechanisms, including absence of DNA-binding, altered interactions with transcriptional coregulators, and differential activity of modifier genes.
19842213	Shadow autozygosity mapping by linkage exclusion (SAMPLE): a simple strategy to identify the genetic basis of lethal autosomal recessive disorders. Autozygosity mapping has been invaluable for determining the genetic basis of lethal autosomal recessive disorders, but this approach remains challenging because DNA from affected individuals may often be unavailable or of insufficient quality for extensive molecular genetic studies. To circumvent these difficulties, we developed a computer program called "SAMPLE" (for shadow autozygosity mapping by linkage exclusion) to enhance autozygosity mapping through the empirical analysis of haplotypes of unaffected individuals in consanguineous families. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping of unaffected individuals in complex consanguineous pedigrees is used to infer limited chromosomal regions compatible with linkage to a potential disease locus, and to allow the immediate prioritization of potential regions of interest. Further limited genotyping then enables the rapid confirmation and fine mapping of a disease locus. We demonstrate the utility of this strategy by using genotyping data from only parents and unaffected siblings, in three consanguineous families affected with Meckel-Gruber syndrome, to correctly infer the location of the MKS3/TMEM67 locus on chromosome 8q22.1. This strategy is practicable only with the recent advances in whole genome genotyping by high-density SNP microarrays, and could not be easily implemented in approaches that rely on microsatellite markers. SAMPLE is available at http://dna.leeds.ac.uk/sample/.
19847796	Evaluation of SNPs in miR-146a, miR196a2 and miR-499 as low-penetrance alleles in German and Italian familial breast cancer cases. Recently, the SNPs rs11614913 in hsa-mir-196a2 and rs3746444 in hsa-mir-499 were reported to be associated with increased breast cancer risk, and the SNP rs2910164 in hsa-mir-146a was shown to have an effect on age of breast cancer diagnosis. In order to further investigate the effect of these SNPs, we genotyped a total of 1894 breast cancer cases negative for disease-causing mutations or unclassified variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2, and 2760 controls from Germany and Italy. We compared the genotype and allele frequencies of rs2910164, rs11614913 and rs3746444 in cases versus controls of the German and Italian series, and of the two series combined; we also investigated the effect of the three SNPs on age at breast cancer diagnosis. None of the performed analyses showed statistically significant results. In conclusion, our data suggested lack of association between SNPs rs2910164, rs11614913 and rs3746444 and breast cancer risk, or age at breast cancer onset.
20052763	Ex vivo splicing assays of mutations at noncanonical positions of splice sites in USHER genes. Molecular diagnosis in Usher syndrome type 1 and 2 patients led to the identification of 21 sequence variations located in noncanonical positions of splice sites in MYO7A, CDH23, USH1C, and USH2A genes. To establish experimentally the splicing pattern of these substitutions, whose impact on splicing is not always predictable by available softwares, ex vivo splicing assays were performed. The branch-point mapping strategy was also used to investigate further a putative branch-point mutation in USH2A intron 43. Aberrant splicing was demonstrated for 16 of the 21 (76.2%) tested sequence variations. The mutations resulted more frequently in activation of a nearby cryptic splice site or use of a de novo splice site than exon skipping (37.5%). This study allowed the reclassification as splicing mutations of one silent (c.7872G>A (p.Glu2624Glu) in CDH23) and four missense mutations (c.2993G>A (p.Arg998Lys) in USH2A, c.592G>A (p.Ala198Thr), c.3503G>C [p.Arg1168Pro], c.5944G>A (p.Gly1982Arg) in MYO7A), whereas it provided clues about a role in structure/function in four other cases: c.802G>A (p.Gly268Arg), c.653T>A (p.Val218Glu) (USH2A), and c.397C>T (p.His133Tyr), c.3502C>T (p.Arg1168Trp) (MYO7A). Our data provide insights into the contribution of splicing mutations in Usher genes and illustrate the need to define accurately their splicing outcome for diagnostic purposes.
20127982	Disruption of OTC promoter-enhancer interaction in a patient with symptoms of ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency. In a female patient with signs of ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency (OTCD), the only variation found was a heterozygous single nucleotide substitution c.-366A>G. Determination of transcription start sites of human OTC 95, 119 and 169 bp upstream of the initiation codon located the variation upstream of the 5'-untranslated region. We predicted the human promoter and enhancer elements from homology with rat and mouse, performed function analysis of both regulatory regions and assessed the impact of the promoter variation in functional studies using dual luciferase reporter assay. Our data indicate that: (i) Full transcriptional activity of human OTC promoter depends on an upstream enhancer, as do the rodent promoters. (ii) The promoter variation c.-366A>G does not affect the function of the promoter alone but it disrupts the interaction of the promoter with the enhancer. (iii) The promoter-enhancer interaction contributes to tissue specific expression of OTC in the liver. We conclude that mutations in the regulatory regions of OTC can lead to OTCD and should be included in genetic testing.
20186687	Loss-of-function of MYO5B is the main cause of microvillus inclusion disease: 15 novel mutations and a CaCo-2 RNAi cell model. Autosomal recessive microvillus inclusion disease (MVID) is characterized by an intractable diarrhea starting within the first few weeks of life. The hallmarks of MVID are a lack of microvilli on the surface of villous enterocytes, occurrence of intracellular vacuoles lined by microvilli (microvillus inclusions), and the cytoplasmic accumulation of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive vesicles in enterocytes. Recently, we identified mutations in MYO5B, encoding the unconventional type Vb myosin motor protein, in a first cohort of nine MVID patients. In this study, we identified 15 novel nonsense and missense mutations in MYO5B in 11 unrelated MVID patients. Fluorescence microscopy, Western blotting, and electron microscopy were applied to analyze the effects of MYO5B siRNA knock-down in polarized, brush border possessing CaCo-2 cells. Loss of surface microvilli, increased formation of microvillus inclusions, and subapical enrichment of PAS-positive endomembrane compartments were induced in polarized, filter-grown CaCo-2 cells, following MYO5B knock-down. Our data indicate that MYO5B mutations are a major cause of microvillus inclusion disease and that MYO5B knock-down recapitulates most of the cellular phenotype in vitro, thus independently showing loss of MYO5B function as the cause of microvillus inclusion disease.
20333758	Functional analysis of mutations in the ATP loop of the Wilson disease copper transporter, ATP7B. Wilson disease (WND) is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from mutation of ATP7B. Transport of copper by ATP7B from the trans-Golgi of hepatocytes into apical membrane-trafficked vesicles for excretion in the bile is the major means of copper elimination from the body. Although copper is an essential nutrient, homeostasis must be carefully maintained. If homeostasis is disrupted, copper can accumulate within the liver, kidney, cornea, and/or brain. The range of organs affected leads to clinical heterogeneity and difficulty in WND diagnosis. Sequencing of ATP7B is an important adjunct for diagnosis but has led to the discovery of many novel missense variants. Although prediction programs are available, functional characterization is essential for determining the consequence of novel variants. We have tested 12 missense variants localized to the ATP loop of ATP7B and compared three predictive programs (SIFT, PolyPhen, and Align-GVGD). We found p.L1043P, p.G1000R, p.G1101R, p.I1102T, p.V1239G, and p.D1267V deleterious; p.G1176E and p.G1287S intermediate; p.E1173G temperature sensitive; p.T991M and p.I1148T mild; and p.R1228T functioning as wild type. We found that SIFT most often agreed with functional data (92%), compared with PolyPhen (83%) and Align-GVGD (67%). We conclude that variants found to negatively affect function likely contribute to the WND phenotype in patients.
20506298	Dissecting the pathogenic mechanisms of mutations in the pore region of the human cone photoreceptor cyclic nucleotide-gated channel. The CNGA3 gene encodes the A3 subunit of the cone photoreceptor cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channel, an essential component of the phototransduction cascade. Certain mutations in CNGA3 cause autosomal recessive achromatopsia, a retinal disorder characterized by severely reduced visual acuity, lack of color discrimination, photophobia, and nystagmus. We identified three novel mutations in the pore-forming region of CNGA3 (L363P, G367V, and E376K) in patients diagnosed with achromatopsia. We assessed the expression and function of channels with these three new and two previously described mutations (S341P and P372S) in a heterologous HEK293 cell expression system using Western blot, subcellular localization on the basis of immunocytochemistry, calcium imaging, and patch clamp recordings. In this first comparative functional analysis of disease-associated mutations in the pore of a CNG channel, we found impaired surface expression of S341P, L363P, and P372S mutants and reduced macroscopic currents for channels with the mutations S341P, G367V, and E376K. Calcium imaging and patch clamp experiments after incubation at 37 degrees C revealed nonfunctional homo- and heteromeric channels in all five mutants, but incubation at 27 degrees C combined with coexpression of the B3 subunit restored residual function of channels with the mutations S341P, G367V, and E376K.
20506408	Functionality of sequence variants in the genes coding for the low-density lipoprotein receptor and apolipoprotein B in individuals with inherited hypercholesterolemia. Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) have elevated LDL-C levels, usually above the 90th percentile (P90) for age and gender. However, large-scale genetic cascade screening for FH showed that 15% of the LDL-receptor (LDLR) or Apolipoprotein B (APOB) mutation carriers have LDL-C levels below P75. Nonpathogenicity of sequence changes may explain this phenomenon. To assess pathogenicity of a mutation we proposed three criteria: (1) mean LDL-C 4P75 in untreated mutation carriers; (2) higher mean LDL-C level in untreated carriers than in untreated noncarriers; and (3) higher percentage of medication users in carriers than in noncarriers at screening. We considered a mutation nonpathogenic when none of the three criteria were met. We applied these criteria to mutations that had been determined in more than 50 untreated adults. Segregation analysis was performed to confirm nonpathogenicity. Forty-six mutations had been tested in more than 50 untreated subjects, and three were nonpathogenic according to our criteria: one in LDLR (c.108C4A, exon 2) and two in APOB (c.13154T4C and c.13181T4C, both in exon 29). Segregation analysis also indicated nonpathogenicity. According to our criteria, three sequence variants were nonpathogenic. The criteria may help to identify nonpathogenic sequence changes in genetic cascade screening programs.
20607857	UMD-CFTR: a database dedicated to CF and CFTR-related disorders. With the increasing knowledge of cystic fibrosis (CF) and CFTR-related diseases (CFTR-RD), the number of sequence variations in the CFTR gene is constantly raising. CF and particularly CFTR-RD provide a particular challenge because of many unclassified variants and identical genotypes associated with different phenotypes. Using the Universal Mutation Database (UMD) software we have constructed UMD-CFTR (freely available at the URL: http://www.umd.be/CFTR/), the first comprehensive relational CFTR database that allows an in-depth analysis and annotation of all variations identified in individuals whose CFTR genes have been analyzed extensively. The system has been tested on the molecular data from 757 patients (540 CF and 217 CBAVD) including disease-causing, unclassified, and nonpathogenic alterations (301 different sequence variations) representing 3,973 entries. Tools are provided to assess the pathogenicity of mutations. UMD-CFTR also offers a number of query tools and graphical views providing instant access to the list of mutations, their frequencies, positions and predicted consequences, or correlations between genotypes, haplotypes, and phenotypes. UMD-CFTR offers a way to compile not only disease-causing genotypes but also haplotypes. It will help the CFTR scientific and medical communities to improve sequence variation interpretation, evaluate the putative influence of haplotypes on mutations, and correlate molecular data with phenotypes.
20652909	A custom 148 gene-based resequencing chip and the SNP explorer software: new tools to study antibody deficiency. Hyper-IgM syndrome and Common Variable Immunodeficiency are heterogeneous disorders characterized by a predisposition to serious infection and impaired or absent neutralizing antibody responses. Although a number of single gene defects have been associated with these immune deficiency disorders, the genetic basis of many cases is not known. To facilitate mutation screening in patients with these syndromes, we have developed a custom 300-kb resequencing array, the Hyper-IgM/CVID chip, which interrogates 1,576 coding exons and intron-exon junction regions from 148 genes implicated in B-cell development and immunoglobulin isotype switching. Genomic DNAs extracted from patients were hybridized to the array using a high-throughput protocol for target sequence amplification, pooling, and hybridization. A Web-based application, SNP Explorer, was developed to directly analyze and visualize the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) annotation and for quality filtering. Several mutations in known disease-susceptibility genes such as CD40LG, TNFRSF13B, IKBKG, AICDA, as well as rare nucleotide changes in other genes such as TRAF3IP2, were identified in patient DNA samples and validated by direct sequencing. We conclude that the Hyper-IgM/CVID chip combined with SNP Explorer may provide a cost-effective tool for high-throughput discovery of novel mutations among hundreds of disease-relevant genes in patients with inherited antibody deficiency.
20672374	Experience with carrier screening and prenatal diagnosis for 16 Ashkenazi Jewish genetic diseases. The success of prenatal carrier screening as a disease prevention strategy in the Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) population has driven the expansion of screening panels as disease-causing founder mutations have been identified. However, the carrier frequencies of many of these mutations have not been reported in large AJ cohorts. We determined the carrier frequencies of over 100 mutations for 16 recessive disorders in the New York metropolitan area AJ population. Among the 100% AJ-descended individuals, screening for 16 disorders resulted in 1 in 3.3 being a carrier for one disease and 1 in 24 for two diseases. The carrier frequencies ranged from 0.066 (1 in 15.2; Gaucher disease) to 0.006 (1 in 168; nemaline myopathy), which averaged 15% higher than those for all screenees. Importantly, over 95% of screenees chose to be screened for all possible AJ diseases, including disorders with lower carrier frequencies and/or detectability. Carrier screening also identified rare individuals homozygous for disease-causing mutations who had previously unrecognized clinical manifestations. Additionally, prenatal testing results and experience for all 16 disorders (n = 574) are reported. Together, these data indicate the general acceptance, carrier frequencies, and prenatal testing results for an expanded panel of 16 diseases in the AJ population.
21280151	Searching for the missing heritability of complex diseases.
21394829	WAVe: web analysis of the variome. DNA sequence variation is the underlying basis of common human traits and rarer single-gene disorders. Understanding the variome, the variants in an individual's genome, is essential to enable the ultimate goals of personalized medicine. This critical research field has grown dramatically in recent years, mostly due to the spread and development of genotyping technologies. Despite these activities being promoted by the Human Genome Variation Society and projects such as the Human Variome Project or the European GEN2PHEN Project, variome data-integration systems are far from being widely used in the research community workflow. Most of ongoing research is focused on improving locus-specific databases. Although the quality and manual curation of LSDBs adds true value to this domain, they are often narrow, heterogeneous, and independent systems. This hampers data harmonization and interoperability between systems, stifling the aggregation of data from LSDBs and related data sources. A new platform entitled Web Analysis of the Variome, WAVe, is introduced. It offers direct and programmatic access to multiple locus-specific databases, with the integration of genetic variation datasets and enrichment with relevant information. WAVe's agile and innovative Web interface is accessible at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/WAVe.
21394830	A mild neurofibromatosis type 1 phenotype produced by the combination of the benign nature of a leaky NF1-splice mutation and the presence of a complex mosaicism. Here we analyze the genetic and molecular basis responsible for a very benign phenotype observed in an NF1 patient. Quantification of cells carrying the NF1 mutation in different samples derived from the three embryonic layers revealed mosaicism. Furthermore, the construction of a minigene with patient's mutation (c.3198 - 314G>A) confirmed its benign nature due to the leakiness of the splicing mechanism that generated a proportion of correctly spliced transcripts. Hence, we concluded that the mild phenotype observed in this patient is the result of the presence of mosaicism together with the benign nature of a leaky NF1-splice mutation. Finally, with the aim of developing a personalized therapeutic approach for this patient, we demonstrated correction of the splicing defect by using specific antisense morpholino oligomers. Our results provide an example of the molecular complexity behind disease phenotypes and highlight the importance of using comprehensive genetic approaches to better assess phenotype-genotype correlations.
21412943	Novel C2orf71 mutations account for 1% of cases in a large French arRP cohort. Autosomal-recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) is a genetically heterogeneous group of disorders to which a novel gene, C2orf71, was recently associated. The purpose of our study was to establish the prevalence and nature of C2orf71 mutations in a clinically well-characterized cohort of 345 sporadic and arRP French cases. Direct sequencing of C2orf71 was performed in 209 subjects for whom mutations had previously been excluded by microarray technology and direct sequencing of EYS. Putative pathogenicity of the identified variants was evaluated through co-segregation analysis, screening of more than 188 control chromosomes and prediction programs. We identified two patients compound heterozygous for mutations predicted to lead to a premature stop codon, 3 of which are novel. In addition, 3 patients carried a single variant of likely pathogenicity. Furthermore a large number of novel putative non-disease causing variants were identified, highlighting the extremely polymorphic nature of C2orf71. To our knowledge, our study provides the first large scale screening of C2orf71 in a French arRP cohort through direct sequencing and suggests that it would account for approximately 1% of arRP cases.
21412948	SNP uniqueness problem: a proof-of-principle in HapMap SNPs. SNP-based research strongly affects our biomedical and clinically associated knowledge. Nonunique and false-positive SNP existence in commonly used datasets may thus lead to biased, inaccurate clinically associated conclusions. We designed a computational study to reveal the degree of nonunique/false-positive SNPs in the HapMap dataset. Two sets of SNP flanking sequences were used as queries for BLAT analysis against the human genome. 4.2% and 11.9% of HapMap SNPs align to the genome nonuniquely (long and short, respectively). Furthermore, an average of 7.9% nonunique SNPs are included in common commercial genotyping arrays (according to our designed probes). Nonunique SNPs identified in this study are represented to various degrees in clinically associated databases, stressing the consequence of inaccurate SNP annotation and hence SNP utilization. Unfortunately, our results question some disease-related genotyping analyses, raising a worrisome concern on their validity.
21412953	Breakage-fusion-bridge cycles leading to inv dup del occur in human cleavage stage embryos. Recently, a high incidence of chromosome instability (CIN) was reported in human cleavage stage embryos. Based on the copy number changes that were observed in the blastomeres it was hypothesized that chromosome breakages and fusions occur frequently in cleavage stage human embryos and instigate subsequent breakage-fusion-bridge cycles. In addition, it was hypothesized that the DNA breaks present in spermatozoa could trigger this CIN. To test these hypotheses, we genotyped both parents as well as 93 blastomeres from 24 IVF embryos and developed a novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array-based algorithm to determine the parental origin of (aberrant) loci in single cells. Paternal as well as maternal alleles were commonly rearranged in the blastomeres indicating that sperm-specific DNA breaks do not explain the majority of these structural variants. The parent-of-origin analyses together with microarray-guided FISH analyses demonstrate the presence of inv dup del chromosomes as well as more complex rearrangements. These data provide unequivocal evidence for breakage-fusion-bridge cycles in those embryos and suggest that the human cleavage stage embryo is a major source of chromosomal disorders.
21786366	Exome sequencing identifies MRPL3 mutation in mitochondrial cardiomyopathy. By combining exome sequencing in conjunction with genetic mapping, we have identified the first mutation in large mitochondrial ribosomal protein MRPL3 in a family of four sibs with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, psychomotor retardation, and multiple respiratory chain deficiency. Affected sibs were compound heterozygotes for a missense MRPL3 mutation (P317R) and a large-scale deletion, inherited from the mother and the father, respectively. These mutations were shown to alter ribosome assembly and cause a mitochondrial translation deficiency in cultured skin fibroblasts resulting in an abnormal assembly of several complexes of the respiratory chain. This observation gives support to the view that exome sequencing combined with genetic mapping is a powerful approach for the identification of new genes of mitochondrial disorders.
21882294	SgD-CNV, a database for common and rare copy number variants in three Asian populations. Copy number variants (CNVs) extend our understanding of the genetic diversity in humans. However, the distribution and characteristics of CNVs in Asian populations remain largely unexplored, especially for rare CNVs that have emerged as important genetic factors for complex traits. In the present study, we performed an in-depth investigation of common and rare CNVs across 8,148 individuals from the three major Asian ethnic groups: Chinese (n = 1,945), Malays (n = 2,399), and Indians (n = 2,217) in Singapore, making this investigation the most comprehensive genome-wide survey of CNVs outside the European-ancestry populations to date. We detected about 16 CNVs per individual and the ratio of loss to gain events is 2:1. The majority of the CNVs are of low frequency (<10%), and 40% are rare (<1%). In each population, 20% of the CNVs are not previously catalogued in the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV). Contrary to findings from European studies, the common CNVs (>5%) in our populations are not well tagged by SNPs in Illumina 1M and 610K arrays, and most disease-associated common CNVs previously reported in Caucasians are rare in our populations. We also report noticeable population differentiation in the CNV landscape of these Asian populations, with the greatest diversity seen between the Indians and the Chinese.
21898660	Dilated cardiomyopathy-associated BAG3 mutations impair Z-disc assembly and enhance sensitivity to apoptosis in cardiomyocytes. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by dilation of left ventricular cavity with systolic dysfunction. Clinical symptom of DCM is heart failure, often associated with cardiac sudden death. About 20-35% of DCM patients have apparent family histories and it has been revealed that mutations in genes for sarcomere proteins cause DCM. However, the disease-causing mutations can be found only in about 17% of Japanese patients with familial DCM. Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) is a co-chaperone protein with antiapoptotic function, which localizes at Z-disc in the striated muscles. Recently, BAG3 gene mutations in DCM patients were reported, but the functional abnormalities caused by the mutations are not fully unraveled. In this study, we analyzed 72 Japanese familial DCM patients for mutations in BAG3 and found two mutations, p.Arg218Trp and p.Leu462Pro, in two cases of adult-onset DCM without skeletal myopathy, which were absent from 400 control subjects. Functional studies at the cellular level revealed that the DCM-associated BAG3 mutations impaired the Z-disc assembly and increased the sensitivities to stress-induced apoptosis. These observations suggested that BAG3 mutations present in 2.8% of Japanese familial DCM patients caused DCM possibly by interfering with Z-disc assembly and inducing apoptotic cell death under the metabolic stress.
21901788	Estimating the degree of identity by descent in consanguineous couples. In some clinical and research settings, it is often necessary to identify the true level of "identity by descent" (IBD) between two individuals. However, as the individuals become more distantly related, it is increasingly difficult to accurately calculate this value. Consequently, we have developed a computer program that uses genome-wide SNP genotype data from related individuals to estimate the size and extent of IBD in their genomes. In addition, the software can compare a couple's IBD regions with either the autozygous regions of a relative affected by an autosomal recessive disease of unknown cause, or the IBD regions in the parents of the affected relative. It is then possible to calculate the probability of one of the couple's children suffering from the same disease. The software works by finding SNPs that exclude any possible IBD and then identifies regions that lack these SNPs, while exceeding a minimum size and number of SNPs. The accuracy of the algorithm was established by estimating the pairwise IBD between different members of a large pedigree with varying known coefficients of genetic relationship (CGR).
21922597	Fine-tiling array CGH to improve diagnostics for - and -thalassemia rearrangements. Implementation of multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for thalassemia causing deletions has lead to the detection of new rearrangements. Knowledge of the exact breakpoint sequences should give more insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying these rearrangements, and would facilitate the design of gap-PCRs. We have designed a custom fine-tiling array with oligonucleotides covering the complete globin gene clusters. We hybridized 27 DNA samples containing newly identified deletions and nine positive controls. We designed specific primers to amplify relatively short fragments containing the breakpoint sequence and analyzed these by direct sequencing. Results from nine positive controls showed that array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is suitable to detect small and large rearrangements. We were able to locate all breakpoints to a region of approximately 2 kb. We designed breakpoint primers for 22 cases and amplification was successful in 19 cases. For 12 of these, the exact locations of the breakpoints were determined. Seven of these deletions have not been reported before. aCGH is a valuable tool for high-resolution breakpoint characterization. The combination of MLPA and aCGH has lead to relatively cheap and easy to perform PCR assays, which might be of use for laboratories as an alternative for MLPA in populations where only a limited number of specific deletions occur with high frequency.
22052681	A novel mutation impairing the tertiary structure and stability of C-crystallin (CRYGC) leads to cataract formation in humans and zebrafish lens. Congenital cataract is one of the leading causes of human blindness. In this study, we identified a novel, heterozygous c.385G<T mutation in CRYGC that resulted in the substitution of a highly conserved glycine by cysteine at codon 129 (p.Gly129Cys) in a three-generation Chinese family with autosomal dominant congenital nuclear cataract by sequencing candidate genes. Using zebrafish as a model, we demonstrated that C-crystallin p.Gly129Cys mutant caused the vacuole and the incomplete denucleation of lens, recapitulating the cataract phenotype in human beings. Molecular modeling and spectroscopic studies indicated that the mutation impaired the tertiary structure of the protein by modifying the H-bonding network in the C-terminal domain. The mutation led to a dramatic decrease in the thermal stability of C-crystallin, and a significant increase in the propensity of aggregation when subject to storage at high concentrations, heat, and UV- irradiation stresses. Taken together, these results indicate that a novel C-crystallin p.Gly129Cys mutation impaired the tertiary structure of the protein and caused cataract formation, which provides a new insight into how the mutation may affect the C-crystallin structure, stability, and function. Our study also highlighted zebrafish as a valuable model tool for studying congenital inherited cataract.
22213154	Update of PAX2 mutations in renal coloboma syndrome and establishment of a locus-specific database. Renal coloboma syndrome, also known as papillorenal syndrome is an autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by ocular and renal malformations. Mutations in the paired-box gene, PAX2, have been identified in approximately half of individuals with classic findings of renal hypoplasia/dysplasia and abnormalities of the optic nerve. Prior to 2011, there was no actively maintained locus-specific database (LSDB) cataloguing the extent of genetic variation in the PAX2 gene and phenotypic variation in individuals with renal coloboma syndrome. Review of published cases and the collective diagnostic experience of three laboratories in the United States, France, and New Zealand identified 55 unique mutations in 173 individuals from 86 families. The three clinical laboratories participating in this collaboration contributed 28 novel variations in 68 individuals in 33 families, which represent a 50% increase in the number of variations, patients, and families published in the medical literature. An LSDB was created using the Leiden Open Variation Database platform: www.lovd.nl/PAX2. The most common findings reported in this series were abnormal renal structure or function (92% of individuals), ophthalmological abnormalities (77% of individuals), and hearing loss (7% of individuals). Additional clinical findings and genetic counseling implications are discussed.
22275001	Nonsynonymous variants in the SMAD6 gene predispose to congenital cardiovascular malformation. Congenital cardiovascular malformation (CVM) exhibits familial predisposition, but most of the specific genetic factors involved are unknown. Postulating that rare variants in genes in critical cardiac developmental pathways predispose to CVM, we systematically surveyed three genes of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway for novel variants. Exonic, splice site, and untranslated regions of BMPR1A, BMPR2, and SMAD6 genes were sequenced in 90 unrelated sporadic cases of CVM. One nonsynonymous variant (p.C484F) with predicted functional impact was found in the MAD homology 2 domain of SMAD6, an intracellular inhibitor of BMP signaling. Sequencing this domain in an additional 346 cases of CVM yielded two further nonsynonymous variants (p.P415L and p.A325T). Functional effects of all three SMAD6 mutations were investigated using BMP signaling assays in vitro. Two SMAD6 variants (p.C484F and p.P415L) had significantly (P < 0.05) lower activity than wild-type SMAD6 in inhibiting BMP signaling in a transcriptional reporter assay. In addition, the p.C484F variant had a significantly (P < 0.05) lower capacity to inhibit an osteogenic response to BMP signaling. We conclude that low-frequency deleterious variants in SMAD6 predispose to CVM. This is the first report of a human disease phenotype related to genetic variation in SMAD6.
22290723	Association of glycosylated hemoglobin with the gene encoding CDKAL1 in the Korean Association Resource (KARE) study. Genome-wide associations with glycosylated hemoglobin, which reflects the long-term glycemia, were examined using two independent cohorts of the Korea Association Resource (KARE) consortium. We first identified sequence variants within a linkage disequilibrium block (r(2) > 0.98) in the intron 5 of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit-associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1) gene using 4,275 normoglycemic subjects of Cohort 1 (P < 2.5  10(-8)). The association was replicated in 3,782 normoglycemic subjects of Cohort 2. Furthermore, the sequence variants were also associated with glucose levels after oral glucose tolerance test. Especially, a strong association with 1 h glucose (P = 1.3  10(-11)) led us to interpreting that CDKAL1 might influence the level of glycosylated hemoglobin by affecting 1 h glucose level. Ultimately, accumulated effects on the glycosylated hemoglobin level by the genetic variation of CDKAL1 might affect susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus.
22331697	Microarray-based copy number analysis of neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1)-associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors reveals a role for Rho-GTPase pathway genes in NF1 tumorigenesis. Neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1) is associated with the growth of benign and malignant tumors. Approximately 15% of NF1 patients develop malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs), underlining the need to identify specific diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers associated with MPNST development. The Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) Array 6.0 was used to perform SNP genotyping and copy number alteration (CNA), loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH), and copy number neutral-LOH (CNN-LOH) analyses of DNA isolated from 15 MPNSTs, five benign plexiform neurofibromas (PNFs), and patient-matched lymphocyte DNAs. MPNSTs exhibited high-level CNN-LOH, with recurrent changes occurring in MPNSTs but not PNFs. CNN-LOH was evident in MPNSTs but occurred less frequently than genomic deletions. CNAs involving the ITGB8, PDGFA, Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 (RAC1) (7p21-p22), PDGFRL (8p22-p21.3), and matrix metallopeptidase 12 (MMP12) (11q22.3) genes were specific to MPNSTs. Pathway analysis revealed the MPNST-specific amplification of seven Rho-GTPase pathway genes and several cytoskeletal remodeling/cell adhesion genes. In knockdown experiments employing short-hairpin RAC1, ROCK2, PTK2, and LIMK1 RNAs to transfect both control and MPNST-derived cell lines, cell adhesion was significantly increased in the MPNST cell lines, whereas wound healing, cell migration, and invasiveness were reduced, consistent with a role for these Rho-GTPase pathway genes in MPNST development and metastasis. These results suggest new targets for therapeutic intervention in relation to MPNSTs.
22434506	Large-scale objective phenotyping of 3D facial morphology. Abnormal phenotypes have played significant roles in the discovery of gene function, but organized collection of phenotype data has been overshadowed by developments in sequencing technology. In order to study phenotypes systematically, large-scale projects with standardized objective assessment across populations are considered necessary. The report of the 2006 Human Variome Project meeting (Cotton et al, 2007) recommended documentation of phenotypes through electronic means by collaborative groups of computational scientists and clinicians using standard, structured descriptions of disease-specific phenotypes. In this report, we describe progress over the past decade in three-dimensional (3D) digital imaging and shape analysis of the face, and future prospects for large-scale facial phenotyping. Illustrative examples are given throughout using a collection of 1,107 3D face images of healthy controls and individuals with a range of genetic conditions involving facial dysmorphism.
22473970	A diagnostic genetic test for the physical mapping of germline rearrangements in the susceptibility breast cancer genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are involved in breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility. About 2 to 4% of breast cancer patients with positive family history, negative for point mutations, can be expected to carry large rearrangements in one of these two genes. We developed a novel diagnostic genetic test for the physical mapping of large rearrangements, based on molecular combing (MC), a FISH-based technique for direct visualization of single DNA molecules at high resolution. We designed specific Genomic Morse Codes (GMCs), covering the exons, the noncoding regions, and large genomic portions flanking both genes. We validated our approach by testing 10 index cases with positive family history of breast cancer and 50 negative controls. Large rearrangements, corresponding to deletions and duplications with sizes ranging from 3 to 40 kb, were detected and characterized on both genes, including four novel mutations. The nature of all the identified mutations was confirmed by high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and breakpoints characterized by sequencing. The developed GMCs allowed to localize several tandem repeat duplications on both genes. We propose the developed genetic test as a valuable tool to screen large rearrangements in BRCA1 and BRCA2 to be combined in clinical settings with an assay capable of detecting small mutations.
22570304	Retinitis pigmentosa: More genes, more variants, more work.
22623374	Gaucher disease paradigm: From ERAD to comorbidity. Mutations in the GBA gene, encoding the lysosomal acid beta-glucocerebrosidase (GCase), lead to deficient activity of the enzyme in the lysosomes, to glucosylceramide accumulation and to development of Gaucher disease (GD). More than 280 mutations in the GBA gene have been directly associated with GD. Mutant GCase variants present variable levels of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention, due to their inability to correctly fold, and undergo ER-associated degradation (ERAD) in the proteasomes. The degree of ER retention and proteasomal degradation is one of the factors that determine GD severity. In the present review, we discuss ERAD of mutant GCase variants and its possible consequences in GD patients and in carriers of GD mutations. Hum Mutat 33:1398-1407, 2012.  2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
